  	A LOVER'S COMPLAINT



FROM off a hill whose concave womb reworded
A plaintful story from a sistering vale,
My spirits to attend this double voice accorded,
And down I laid to list the sad-tuned tale;
Ere long espied a fickle maid full pale,
Tearing of papers, breaking rings a-twain,
Storming her world with sorrow's wind and rain.

Upon her head a platted hive of straw,
Which fortified her visage from the sun,
Whereon the thought might think sometime it saw
The carcass of beauty spent and done:
Time had not scythed all that youth begun,
Nor youth all quit; but, spite of heaven's fell rage,
Some beauty peep'd through lattice of sear'd age.

Oft did she heave her napkin to her eyne,
Which on it had conceited characters,
Laundering the silken figures in the brine
That season'd woe had pelleted in tears,
And often reading what contents it bears;
As often shrieking undistinguish'd woe,
In clamours of all size, both high and low.

Sometimes her levell'd eyes their carriage ride,
As they did battery to the spheres intend;
Sometime diverted their poor balls are tied
To the orbed earth; sometimes they do extend
Their view right on; anon their gazes lend
To every place at once, and, nowhere fix'd,
The mind and sight distractedly commix'd.

Her hair, nor loose nor tied in formal plat,
Proclaim'd in her a careless hand of pride
For some, untuck'd, descended her sheaved hat,
Hanging her pale and pined cheek beside;
Some in her threaden fillet still did bide,
And true to bondage would not break from thence,
Though slackly braided in loose negligence.

A thousand favours from a maund she drew
Of amber, crystal, and of beaded jet,
Which one by one she in a river threw,
Upon whose weeping margent she was set;
Like usury, applying wet to wet,
Or monarch's hands that let not bounty fall
Where want cries some, but where excess begs all.

Of folded schedules had she many a one,
Which she perused, sigh'd, tore, and gave the flood;
Crack'd many a ring of posied gold and bone
Bidding them find their sepulchres in mud;
Found yet moe letters sadly penn'd in blood,
With sleided silk feat and affectedly
Enswathed, and seal'd to curious secrecy.

These often bathed she in her fluxive eyes,
And often kiss'd, and often 'gan to tear:
Cried 'O false blood, thou register of lies,
What unapproved witness dost thou bear!
Ink would have seem'd more black and damned here!'
This said, in top of rage the lines she rents,
Big discontent so breaking their contents.

A reverend man that grazed his cattle nigh--
Sometime a blusterer, that the ruffle knew
Of court, of city, and had let go by
The swiftest hours, observed as they flew--
Towards this afflicted fancy fastly drew,
And, privileged by age, desires to know
In brief the grounds and motives of her woe.

So slides he down upon his grained bat,
And comely-distant sits he by her side;
When he again desires her, being sat,
Her grievance with his hearing to divide:
If that from him there may be aught applied
Which may her suffering ecstasy assuage,
'Tis promised in the charity of age.

'Father,' she says, 'though in me you behold
The injury of many a blasting hour,
Let it not tell your judgment I am old;
Not age, but sorrow, over me hath power:
I might as yet have been a spreading flower,
Fresh to myself, If I had self-applied
Love to myself and to no love beside.

'But, woe is me! too early I attended
A youthful suit--it was to gain my grace--
Of one by nature's outwards so commended,
That maidens' eyes stuck over all his face:
Love lack'd a dwelling, and made him her place;
And when in his fair parts she did abide,
She was new lodged and newly deified.

'His browny locks did hang in crooked curls;
And every light occasion of the wind
Upon his lips their silken parcels hurls.
What's sweet to do, to do will aptly find:
Each eye that saw him did enchant the mind,
For on his visage was in little drawn
What largeness thinks in Paradise was sawn.

'Small show of man was yet upon his chin;
His phoenix down began but to appear
Like unshorn velvet on that termless skin
Whose bare out-bragg'd the web it seem'd to wear:
Yet show'd his visage by that cost more dear;
And nice affections wavering stood in doubt
If best were as it was, or best without.

'His qualities were beauteous as his form,
For maiden-tongued he was, and thereof free;
Yet, if men moved him, was he such a storm
As oft 'twixt May and April is to see,
When winds breathe sweet, untidy though they be.
His rudeness so with his authorized youth
Did livery falseness in a pride of truth.

'Well could he ride, and often men would say
'That horse his mettle from his rider takes:
Proud of subjection, noble by the sway,
What rounds, what bounds, what course, what stop
he makes!'
And controversy hence a question takes,
Whether the horse by him became his deed,
Or he his manage by the well-doing steed.

'But quickly on this side the verdict went:
His real habitude gave life and grace
To appertainings and to ornament,
Accomplish'd in himself, not in his case:
All aids, themselves made fairer by their place,
Came for additions; yet their purposed trim
Pieced not his grace, but were all graced by him.

'So on the tip of his subduing tongue
All kinds of arguments and question deep,
All replication prompt, and reason strong,
For his advantage still did wake and sleep:
To make the weeper laugh, the laugher weep,
He had the dialect and different skill,
Catching all passions in his craft of will:

'That he did in the general bosom reign
Of young, of old; and sexes both enchanted,
To dwell with him in thoughts, or to remain
In personal duty, following where he haunted:
Consents bewitch'd, ere he desire, have granted;
And dialogued for him what he would say,
Ask'd their own wills, and made their wills obey.

'Many there were that did his picture get,
To serve their eyes, and in it put their mind;
Like fools that in th' imagination set
The goodly objects which abroad they find
Of lands and mansions, theirs in thought assign'd;
And labouring in moe pleasures to bestow them
Than the true gouty landlord which doth owe them:

'So many have, that never touch'd his hand,
Sweetly supposed them mistress of his heart.
My woeful self, that did in freedom stand,
And was my own fee-simple, not in part,
What with his art in youth, and youth in art,
Threw my affections in his charmed power,
Reserved the stalk and gave him all my flower.

'Yet did I not, as some my equals did,
Demand of him, nor being desired yielded;
Finding myself in honour so forbid,
With safest distance I mine honour shielded:
Experience for me many bulwarks builded
Of proofs new-bleeding, which remain'd the foil
Of this false jewel, and his amorous spoil.

'But, ah, who ever shunn'd by precedent
The destined ill she must herself assay?
Or forced examples, 'gainst her own content,
To put the by-past perils in her way?
Counsel may stop awhile what will not stay;
For when we rage, advice is often seen
By blunting us to make our wits more keen.

'Nor gives it satisfaction to our blood,
That we must curb it upon others' proof;
To be forbod the sweets that seem so good,
For fear of harms that preach in our behoof.
O appetite, from judgment stand aloof!
The one a palate hath that needs will taste,
Though Reason weep, and cry, 'It is thy last.'

'For further I could say 'This man's untrue,'
And knew the patterns of his foul beguiling;
Heard where his plants in others' orchards grew,
Saw how deceits were gilded in his smiling;
Knew vows were ever brokers to defiling;
Thought characters and words merely but art,
And bastards of his foul adulterate heart.

'And long upon these terms I held my city,
Till thus he gan besiege me: 'Gentle maid,
Have of my suffering youth some feeling pity,
And be not of my holy vows afraid:
That's to ye sworn to none was ever said;
For feasts of love I have been call'd unto,
Till now did ne'er invite, nor never woo.

''All my offences that abroad you see
Are errors of the blood, none of the mind;
Love made them not: with acture they may be,
Where neither party is nor true nor kind:
They sought their shame that so their shame did find;
And so much less of shame in me remains,
By how much of me their reproach contains.

''Among the many that mine eyes have seen,
Not one whose flame my heart so much as warm'd,
Or my affection put to the smallest teen,
Or any of my leisures ever charm'd:
Harm have I done to them, but ne'er was harm'd;
Kept hearts in liveries, but mine own was free,
And reign'd, commanding in his monarchy.

''Look here, what tributes wounded fancies sent me,
Of paled pearls and rubies red as blood;
Figuring that they their passions likewise lent me
Of grief and blushes, aptly understood
In bloodless white and the encrimson'd mood;
Effects of terror and dear modesty,
Encamp'd in hearts, but fighting outwardly.

''And, lo, behold these talents of their hair,
With twisted metal amorously impleach'd,
I have received from many a several fair,
Their kind acceptance weepingly beseech'd,
With the annexions of fair gems enrich'd,
And deep-brain'd sonnets that did amplify
Each stone's dear nature, worth, and quality.

''The diamond,--why, 'twas beautiful and hard,
Whereto his invised properties did tend;
The deep-green emerald, in whose fresh regard
Weak sights their sickly radiance do amend;
The heaven-hued sapphire and the opal blend
With objects manifold: each several stone,
With wit well blazon'd, smiled or made some moan.

''Lo, all these trophies of affections hot,
Of pensived and subdued desires the tender,
Nature hath charged me that I hoard them not,
But yield them up where I myself must render,
That is, to you, my origin and ender;
For these, of force, must your oblations be,
Since I their altar, you enpatron me.

''O, then, advance of yours that phraseless hand,
Whose white weighs down the airy scale of praise;
Take all these similes to your own command,
Hallow'd with sighs that burning lungs did raise;
What me your minister, for you obeys,
Works under you; and to your audit comes
Their distract parcels in combined sums.

''Lo, this device was sent me from a nun,
Or sister sanctified, of holiest note;
Which late her noble suit in court did shun,
Whose rarest havings made the blossoms dote;
For she was sought by spirits of richest coat,
But kept cold distance, and did thence remove,
To spend her living in eternal love.

''But, O my sweet, what labour is't to leave
The thing we have not, mastering what not strives,
Playing the place which did no form receive,
Playing patient sports in unconstrained gyves?
She that her fame so to herself contrives,
The scars of battle 'scapeth by the flight,
And makes her absence valiant, not her might.

''O, pardon me, in that my boast is true:
The accident which brought me to her eye
Upon the moment did her force subdue,
And now she would the caged cloister fly:
Religious love put out Religion's eye:
Not to be tempted, would she be immured,
And now, to tempt, all liberty procured.

''How mighty then you are, O, hear me tell!
The broken bosoms that to me belong
Have emptied all their fountains in my well,
And mine I pour your ocean all among:
I strong o'er them, and you o'er me being strong,
Must for your victory us all congest,
As compound love to physic your cold breast.

''My parts had power to charm a sacred nun,
Who, disciplined, ay, dieted in grace,
Believed her eyes when they to assail begun,
All vows and consecrations giving place:
O most potential love! vow, bond, nor space,
In thee hath neither sting, knot, nor confine,
For thou art all, and all things else are thine.

''When thou impressest, what are precepts worth
Of stale example? When thou wilt inflame,
How coldly those impediments stand forth
Of wealth, of filial fear, law, kindred, fame!
Love's arms are peace, 'gainst rule, 'gainst sense,
'gainst shame,
And sweetens, in the suffering pangs it bears,
The aloes of all forces, shocks, and fears.

''Now all these hearts that do on mine depend,
Feeling it break, with bleeding groans they pine;
And supplicant their sighs to you extend,
To leave the battery that you make 'gainst mine,
Lending soft audience to my sweet design,
And credent soul to that strong-bonded oath
That shall prefer and undertake my troth.'

'This said, his watery eyes he did dismount,
Whose sights till then were levell'd on my face;
Each cheek a river running from a fount
With brinish current downward flow'd apace:
O, how the channel to the stream gave grace!
Who glazed with crystal gate the glowing roses
That flame through water which their hue encloses.

'O father, what a hell of witchcraft lies
In the small orb of one particular tear!
But with the inundation of the eyes
What rocky heart to water will not wear?
What breast so cold that is not warmed here?
O cleft effect! cold modesty, hot wrath,
Both fire from hence and chill extincture hath.

'For, lo, his passion, but an art of craft,
Even there resolved my reason into tears;
There my white stole of chastity I daff'd,
Shook off my sober guards and civil fears;
Appear to him, as he to me appears,
All melting; though our drops this difference bore,
His poison'd me, and mine did him restore.

'In him a plenitude of subtle matter,
Applied to cautels, all strange forms receives,
Of burning blushes, or of weeping water,
Or swooning paleness; and he takes and leaves,
In either's aptness, as it best deceives,
To blush at speeches rank to weep at woes,
Or to turn white and swoon at tragic shows.

'That not a heart which in his level came
Could 'scape the hail of his all-hurting aim,
Showing fair nature is both kind and tame;
And, veil'd in them, did win whom he would maim:
Against the thing he sought he would exclaim;
When he most burn'd in heart-wish'd luxury,
He preach'd pure maid, and praised cold chastity.

'Thus merely with the garment of a Grace
The naked and concealed fiend he cover'd;
That th' unexperient gave the tempter place,
Which like a cherubin above them hover'd.
Who, young and simple, would not be so lover'd?
Ay me! I fell; and yet do question make
What I should do again for such a sake.

'O, that infected moisture of his eye,
O, that false fire which in his cheek so glow'd,
O, that forced thunder from his heart did fly,
O, that sad breath his spongy lungs bestow'd,
O, all that borrow'd motion seeming owed,
Would yet again betray the fore-betray'd,
And new pervert a reconciled maid!'


	ROMEO AND JULIET


	DRAMATIS PERSONAE


ESCALUS	prince of Verona. (PRINCE:)

PARIS	a young nobleman, kinsman to the prince.


MONTAGUE	|
	|  heads of two houses at variance with each other.
CAPULET	|


	An old man, cousin to Capulet. (Second Capulet:)

ROMEO	son to Montague.

MERCUTIO	kinsman to the prince, and friend to Romeo.

BENVOLIO	nephew to Montague, and friend to Romeo.

TYBALT	nephew to Lady Capulet.


FRIAR LAURENCE	|
	|  Franciscans.
FRIAR JOHN	|


BALTHASAR	servant to Romeo.


SAMPSON	|
	|  servants to Capulet.
GREGORY	|


PETER	servant to Juliet's nurse.

ABRAHAM	servant to Montague.

	An Apothecary. (Apothecary:)

	Three Musicians.
	(First Musician:)
	(Second Musician:)
	(Third Musician:)

	Page to Paris; (PAGE:)  another Page; an officer.

LADY MONTAGUE	wife to Montague.

LADY CAPULET	wife to Capulet.

JULIET	daughter to Capulet.

	Nurse to Juliet. (Nurse:)

	Citizens of Verona; several Men and Women,
	relations to both houses; Maskers,
	Guards, Watchmen, and Attendants.
	(First Citizen:)
	(Servant:)
	(First Servant:)
	(Second Servant:)
	(First Watchman:)
	(Second Watchman:)
	(Third Watchman:)
	Chorus.


SCENE	Verona: Mantua.




	ROMEO AND JULIET

	PROLOGUE


	Two households, both alike in dignity,
	In fair Verona, where we lay our scene,
	From ancient grudge break to new mutiny,
	Where civil blood makes civil hands unclean.
	From forth the fatal loins of these two foes
	A pair of star-cross'd lovers take their life;
	Whole misadventured piteous overthrows
	Do with their death bury their parents' strife.
	The fearful passage of their death-mark'd love,
	And the continuance of their parents' rage,
	Which, but their children's end, nought could remove,
	Is now the two hours' traffic of our stage;
	The which if you with patient ears attend,
	What here shall miss, our toil shall strive to mend.




	ROMEO AND JULIET


ACT I



SCENE I	Verona. A public place.


	[Enter SAMPSON and GREGORY, of the house of Capulet,
	armed with swords and bucklers]

SAMPSON	Gregory, o' my word, we'll not carry coals.

GREGORY	No, for then we should be colliers.

SAMPSON	I mean, an we be in choler, we'll draw.

GREGORY	Ay, while you live, draw your neck out o' the collar.

SAMPSON	I strike quickly, being moved.

GREGORY	But thou art not quickly moved to strike.

SAMPSON	A dog of the house of Montague moves me.

GREGORY	To move is to stir; and to be valiant is to stand:
	therefore, if thou art moved, thou runn'st away.

SAMPSON	A dog of that house shall move me to stand: I will
	take the wall of any man or maid of Montague's.

GREGORY	That shows thee a weak slave; for the weakest goes
	to the wall.

SAMPSON	True; and therefore women, being the weaker vessels,
	are ever thrust to the wall: therefore I will push
	Montague's men from the wall, and thrust his maids
	to the wall.

GREGORY	The quarrel is between our masters and us their men.

SAMPSON	'Tis all one, I will show myself a tyrant: when I
	have fought with the men, I will be cruel with the
	maids, and cut off their heads.

GREGORY	The heads of the maids?

SAMPSON	Ay, the heads of the maids, or their maidenheads;
	take it in what sense thou wilt.

GREGORY	They must take it in sense that feel it.

SAMPSON	Me they shall feel while I am able to stand: and
	'tis known I am a pretty piece of flesh.

GREGORY	'Tis well thou art not fish; if thou hadst, thou
	hadst been poor John. Draw thy tool! here comes
	two of the house of the Montagues.

SAMPSON	My naked weapon is out: quarrel, I will back thee.

GREGORY	How! turn thy back and run?

SAMPSON	Fear me not.

GREGORY	No, marry; I fear thee!

SAMPSON	Let us take the law of our sides; let them begin.

GREGORY	I will frown as I pass by, and let them take it as
	they list.

SAMPSON	Nay, as they dare. I will bite my thumb at them;
	which is a disgrace to them, if they bear it.

	[Enter ABRAHAM and BALTHASAR]

ABRAHAM	Do you bite your thumb at us, sir?

SAMPSON	I do bite my thumb, sir.

ABRAHAM	Do you bite your thumb at us, sir?

SAMPSON	[Aside to GREGORY]  Is the law of our side, if I say
	ay?

GREGORY	No.

SAMPSON	No, sir, I do not bite my thumb at you, sir, but I
	bite my thumb, sir.

GREGORY	Do you quarrel, sir?

ABRAHAM	Quarrel sir! no, sir.

SAMPSON	If you do, sir, I am for you: I serve as good a man as you.

ABRAHAM	No better.

SAMPSON	Well, sir.

GREGORY	Say 'better:' here comes one of my master's kinsmen.

SAMPSON	Yes, better, sir.

ABRAHAM	You lie.

SAMPSON	Draw, if you be men. Gregory, remember thy swashing blow.

	[They fight]

	[Enter BENVOLIO]

BENVOLIO	Part, fools!
	Put up your swords; you know not what you do.

	[Beats down their swords]

	[Enter TYBALT]

TYBALT	What, art thou drawn among these heartless hinds?
	Turn thee, Benvolio, look upon thy death.

BENVOLIO	I do but keep the peace: put up thy sword,
	Or manage it to part these men with me.

TYBALT	What, drawn, and talk of peace! I hate the word,
	As I hate hell, all Montagues, and thee:
	Have at thee, coward!

	[They fight]

	[Enter, several of both houses, who join the fray;
	then enter Citizens, with clubs]

First Citizen	Clubs, bills, and partisans! strike! beat them down!
	Down with the Capulets! down with the Montagues!

	[Enter CAPULET in his gown, and LADY CAPULET]

CAPULET	What noise is this? Give me my long sword, ho!

LADY CAPULET	A crutch, a crutch! why call you for a sword?

CAPULET	My sword, I say! Old Montague is come,
	And flourishes his blade in spite of me.

	[Enter MONTAGUE and LADY MONTAGUE]

MONTAGUE	Thou villain Capulet,--Hold me not, let me go.

LADY MONTAGUE	Thou shalt not stir a foot to seek a foe.

	[Enter PRINCE, with Attendants]

PRINCE	Rebellious subjects, enemies to peace,
	Profaners of this neighbour-stained steel,--
	Will they not hear? What, ho! you men, you beasts,
	That quench the fire of your pernicious rage
	With purple fountains issuing from your veins,
	On pain of torture, from those bloody hands
	Throw your mistemper'd weapons to the ground,
	And hear the sentence of your moved prince.
	Three civil brawls, bred of an airy word,
	By thee, old Capulet, and Montague,
	Have thrice disturb'd the quiet of our streets,
	And made Verona's ancient citizens
	Cast by their grave beseeming ornaments,
	To wield old partisans, in hands as old,
	Canker'd with peace, to part your canker'd hate:
	If ever you disturb our streets again,
	Your lives shall pay the forfeit of the peace.
	For this time, all the rest depart away:
	You Capulet; shall go along with me:
	And, Montague, come you this afternoon,
	To know our further pleasure in this case,
	To old Free-town, our common judgment-place.
	Once more, on pain of death, all men depart.

	[Exeunt all but MONTAGUE, LADY MONTAGUE, and BENVOLIO]

MONTAGUE	Who set this ancient quarrel new abroach?
	Speak, nephew, were you by when it began?

BENVOLIO	Here were the servants of your adversary,
	And yours, close fighting ere I did approach:
	I drew to part them: in the instant came
	The fiery Tybalt, with his sword prepared,
	Which, as he breathed defiance to my ears,
	He swung about his head and cut the winds,
	Who nothing hurt withal hiss'd him in scorn:
	While we were interchanging thrusts and blows,
	Came more and more and fought on part and part,
	Till the prince came, who parted either part.

LADY MONTAGUE	O, where is Romeo? saw you him to-day?
	Right glad I am he was not at this fray.

BENVOLIO	Madam, an hour before the worshipp'd sun
	Peer'd forth the golden window of the east,
	A troubled mind drave me to walk abroad;
	Where, underneath the grove of sycamore
	That westward rooteth from the city's side,
	So early walking did I see your son:
	Towards him I made, but he was ware of me
	And stole into the covert of the wood:
	I, measuring his affections by my own,
	That most are busied when they're most alone,
	Pursued my humour not pursuing his,
	And gladly shunn'd who gladly fled from me.

MONTAGUE	Many a morning hath he there been seen,
	With tears augmenting the fresh morning dew.
	Adding to clouds more clouds with his deep sighs;
	But all so soon as the all-cheering sun
	Should in the furthest east begin to draw
	The shady curtains from Aurora's bed,
	Away from the light steals home my heavy son,
	And private in his chamber pens himself,
	Shuts up his windows, locks far daylight out
	And makes himself an artificial night:
	Black and portentous must this humour prove,
	Unless good counsel may the cause remove.

BENVOLIO	My noble uncle, do you know the cause?

MONTAGUE	I neither know it nor can learn of him.

BENVOLIO	Have you importuned him by any means?

MONTAGUE	Both by myself and many other friends:
	But he, his own affections' counsellor,
	Is to himself--I will not say how true--
	But to himself so secret and so close,
	So far from sounding and discovery,
	As is the bud bit with an envious worm,
	Ere he can spread his sweet leaves to the air,
	Or dedicate his beauty to the sun.
	Could we but learn from whence his sorrows grow.
	We would as willingly give cure as know.

	[Enter ROMEO]

BENVOLIO	See, where he comes: so please you, step aside;
	I'll know his grievance, or be much denied.

MONTAGUE	I would thou wert so happy by thy stay,
	To hear true shrift. Come, madam, let's away.

	[Exeunt MONTAGUE and LADY MONTAGUE]

BENVOLIO	Good-morrow, cousin.

ROMEO	Is the day so young?

BENVOLIO	But new struck nine.

ROMEO	Ay me! sad hours seem long.
	Was that my father that went hence so fast?

BENVOLIO	It was. What sadness lengthens Romeo's hours?

ROMEO	Not having that, which, having, makes them short.

BENVOLIO	In love?

ROMEO	Out--

BENVOLIO	Of love?

ROMEO	Out of her favour, where I am in love.

BENVOLIO	Alas, that love, so gentle in his view,
	Should be so tyrannous and rough in proof!

ROMEO	Alas, that love, whose view is muffled still,
	Should, without eyes, see pathways to his will!
	Where shall we dine? O me! What fray was here?
	Yet tell me not, for I have heard it all.
	Here's much to do with hate, but more with love.
	Why, then, O brawling love! O loving hate!
	O any thing, of nothing first create!
	O heavy lightness! serious vanity!
	Mis-shapen chaos of well-seeming forms!
	Feather of lead, bright smoke, cold fire,
	sick health!
	Still-waking sleep, that is not what it is!
	This love feel I, that feel no love in this.
	Dost thou not laugh?

BENVOLIO	No, coz, I rather weep.

ROMEO	Good heart, at what?

BENVOLIO	At thy good heart's oppression.

ROMEO	Why, such is love's transgression.
	Griefs of mine own lie heavy in my breast,
	Which thou wilt propagate, to have it prest
	With more of thine: this love that thou hast shown
	Doth add more grief to too much of mine own.
	Love is a smoke raised with the fume of sighs;
	Being purged, a fire sparkling in lovers' eyes;
	Being vex'd a sea nourish'd with lovers' tears:
	What is it else? a madness most discreet,
	A choking gall and a preserving sweet.
	Farewell, my coz.

BENVOLIO	                  Soft! I will go along;
	An if you leave me so, you do me wrong.

ROMEO	Tut, I have lost myself; I am not here;
	This is not Romeo, he's some other where.

BENVOLIO	Tell me in sadness, who is that you love.

ROMEO	What, shall I groan and tell thee?

BENVOLIO	Groan! why, no.
	But sadly tell me who.

ROMEO	Bid a sick man in sadness make his will:
	Ah, word ill urged to one that is so ill!
	In sadness, cousin, I do love a woman.

BENVOLIO	I aim'd so near, when I supposed you loved.

ROMEO	A right good mark-man! And she's fair I love.

BENVOLIO	A right fair mark, fair coz, is soonest hit.

ROMEO	Well, in that hit you miss: she'll not be hit
	With Cupid's arrow; she hath Dian's wit;
	And, in strong proof of chastity well arm'd,
	From love's weak childish bow she lives unharm'd.
	She will not stay the siege of loving terms,
	Nor bide the encounter of assailing eyes,
	Nor ope her lap to saint-seducing gold:
	O, she is rich in beauty, only poor,
	That when she dies with beauty dies her store.

BENVOLIO	Then she hath sworn that she will still live chaste?

ROMEO	She hath, and in that sparing makes huge waste,
	For beauty starved with her severity
	Cuts beauty off from all posterity.
	She is too fair, too wise, wisely too fair,
	To merit bliss by making me despair:
	She hath forsworn to love, and in that vow
	Do I live dead that live to tell it now.

BENVOLIO	Be ruled by me, forget to think of her.

ROMEO	O, teach me how I should forget to think.

BENVOLIO	By giving liberty unto thine eyes;
	Examine other beauties.

ROMEO	'Tis the way
	To call hers exquisite, in question more:
	These happy masks that kiss fair ladies' brows
	Being black put us in mind they hide the fair;
	He that is strucken blind cannot forget
	The precious treasure of his eyesight lost:
	Show me a mistress that is passing fair,
	What doth her beauty serve, but as a note
	Where I may read who pass'd that passing fair?
	Farewell: thou canst not teach me to forget.

BENVOLIO	I'll pay that doctrine, or else die in debt.

	[Exeunt]




	ROMEO AND JULIET


ACT I



SCENE II	A street.


	[Enter CAPULET, PARIS, and Servant]

CAPULET	But Montague is bound as well as I,
	In penalty alike; and 'tis not hard, I think,
	For men so old as we to keep the peace.

PARIS	Of honourable reckoning are you both;
	And pity 'tis you lived at odds so long.
	But now, my lord, what say you to my suit?

CAPULET	But saying o'er what I have said before:
	My child is yet a stranger in the world;
	She hath not seen the change of fourteen years,
	Let two more summers wither in their pride,
	Ere we may think her ripe to be a bride.

PARIS	Younger than she are happy mothers made.

CAPULET	And too soon marr'd are those so early made.
	The earth hath swallow'd all my hopes but she,
	She is the hopeful lady of my earth:
	But woo her, gentle Paris, get her heart,
	My will to her consent is but a part;
	An she agree, within her scope of choice
	Lies my consent and fair according voice.
	This night I hold an old accustom'd feast,
	Whereto I have invited many a guest,
	Such as I love; and you, among the store,
	One more, most welcome, makes my number more.
	At my poor house look to behold this night
	Earth-treading stars that make dark heaven light:
	Such comfort as do lusty young men feel
	When well-apparell'd April on the heel
	Of limping winter treads, even such delight
	Among fresh female buds shall you this night
	Inherit at my house; hear all, all see,
	And like her most whose merit most shall be:
	Which on more view, of many mine being one
	May stand in number, though in reckoning none,
	Come, go with me.

	[To Servant, giving a paper]

	Go, sirrah, trudge about
	Through fair Verona; find those persons out
	Whose names are written there, and to them say,
	My house and welcome on their pleasure stay.

	[Exeunt CAPULET and PARIS]

Servant	Find them out whose names are written here! It is
	written, that the shoemaker should meddle with his
	yard, and the tailor with his last, the fisher with
	his pencil, and the painter with his nets; but I am
	sent to find those persons whose names are here
	writ, and can never find what names the writing
	person hath here writ. I must to the learned.--In good time.

	[Enter BENVOLIO and ROMEO]

BENVOLIO	Tut, man, one fire burns out another's burning,
	One pain is lessen'd by another's anguish;
	Turn giddy, and be holp by backward turning;
	One desperate grief cures with another's languish:
	Take thou some new infection to thy eye,
	And the rank poison of the old will die.

ROMEO	Your plaintain-leaf is excellent for that.

BENVOLIO	For what, I pray thee?

ROMEO	For your broken shin.

BENVOLIO	Why, Romeo, art thou mad?

ROMEO	Not mad, but bound more than a mad-man is;
	Shut up in prison, kept without my food,
	Whipp'd and tormented and--God-den, good fellow.

Servant	God gi' god-den. I pray, sir, can you read?

ROMEO	Ay, mine own fortune in my misery.

Servant	Perhaps you have learned it without book: but, I
	pray, can you read any thing you see?

ROMEO	Ay, if I know the letters and the language.

Servant	Ye say honestly: rest you merry!

ROMEO	Stay, fellow; I can read.

	[Reads]

	'Signior Martino and his wife and daughters;
	County Anselme and his beauteous sisters; the lady
	widow of Vitravio; Signior Placentio and his lovely
	nieces; Mercutio and his brother Valentine; mine
	uncle Capulet, his wife and daughters; my fair niece
	Rosaline; Livia; Signior Valentio and his cousin
	Tybalt, Lucio and the lively Helena.' A fair
	assembly: whither should they come?

Servant	Up.

ROMEO	Whither?

Servant	To supper; to our house.

ROMEO	Whose house?

Servant	My master's.

ROMEO	Indeed, I should have ask'd you that before.

Servant	Now I'll tell you without asking: my master is the
	great rich Capulet; and if you be not of the house
	of Montagues, I pray, come and crush a cup of wine.
	Rest you merry!

	[Exit]

BENVOLIO	At this same ancient feast of Capulet's
	Sups the fair Rosaline whom thou so lovest,
	With all the admired beauties of Verona:
	Go thither; and, with unattainted eye,
	Compare her face with some that I shall show,
	And I will make thee think thy swan a crow.

ROMEO	When the devout religion of mine eye
	Maintains such falsehood, then turn tears to fires;
	And these, who often drown'd could never die,
	Transparent heretics, be burnt for liars!
	One fairer than my love! the all-seeing sun
	Ne'er saw her match since first the world begun.

BENVOLIO	Tut, you saw her fair, none else being by,
	Herself poised with herself in either eye:
	But in that crystal scales let there be weigh'd
	Your lady's love against some other maid
	That I will show you shining at this feast,
	And she shall scant show well that now shows best.

ROMEO	I'll go along, no such sight to be shown,
	But to rejoice in splendor of mine own.

	[Exeunt]




	ROMEO AND JULIET


ACT I



SCENE III	A room in Capulet's house.


	[Enter LADY CAPULET and Nurse]

LADY CAPULET	Nurse, where's my daughter? call her forth to me.

Nurse	Now, by my maidenhead, at twelve year old,
	I bade her come. What, lamb! what, ladybird!
	God forbid! Where's this girl? What, Juliet!

	[Enter JULIET]

JULIET	How now! who calls?

Nurse	Your mother.

JULIET	Madam, I am here.
	What is your will?

LADY CAPULET	This is the matter:--Nurse, give leave awhile,
	We must talk in secret:--nurse, come back again;
	I have remember'd me, thou's hear our counsel.
	Thou know'st my daughter's of a pretty age.

Nurse	Faith, I can tell her age unto an hour.

LADY CAPULET	She's not fourteen.

Nurse	I'll lay fourteen of my teeth,--
	And yet, to my teeth be it spoken, I have but four--
	She is not fourteen. How long is it now
	To Lammas-tide?

LADY CAPULET	                  A fortnight and odd days.

Nurse	Even or odd, of all days in the year,
	Come Lammas-eve at night shall she be fourteen.
	Susan and she--God rest all Christian souls!--
	Were of an age: well, Susan is with God;
	She was too good for me: but, as I said,
	On Lammas-eve at night shall she be fourteen;
	That shall she, marry; I remember it well.
	'Tis since the earthquake now eleven years;
	And she was wean'd,--I never shall forget it,--
	Of all the days of the year, upon that day:
	For I had then laid wormwood to my dug,
	Sitting in the sun under the dove-house wall;
	My lord and you were then at Mantua:--
	Nay, I do bear a brain:--but, as I said,
	When it did taste the wormwood on the nipple
	Of my dug and felt it bitter, pretty fool,
	To see it tetchy and fall out with the dug!
	Shake quoth the dove-house: 'twas no need, I trow,
	To bid me trudge:
	And since that time it is eleven years;
	For then she could stand alone; nay, by the rood,
	She could have run and waddled all about;
	For even the day before, she broke her brow:
	And then my husband--God be with his soul!
	A' was a merry man--took up the child:
	'Yea,' quoth he, 'dost thou fall upon thy face?
	Thou wilt fall backward when thou hast more wit;
	Wilt thou not, Jule?' and, by my holidame,
	The pretty wretch left crying and said 'Ay.'
	To see, now, how a jest shall come about!
	I warrant, an I should live a thousand years,
	I never should forget it: 'Wilt thou not, Jule?' quoth he;
	And, pretty fool, it stinted and said 'Ay.'

LADY CAPULET	Enough of this; I pray thee, hold thy peace.

Nurse	Yes, madam: yet I cannot choose but laugh,
	To think it should leave crying and say 'Ay.'
	And yet, I warrant, it had upon its brow
	A bump as big as a young cockerel's stone;
	A parlous knock; and it cried bitterly:
	'Yea,' quoth my husband,'fall'st upon thy face?
	Thou wilt fall backward when thou comest to age;
	Wilt thou not, Jule?' it stinted and said 'Ay.'

JULIET	And stint thou too, I pray thee, nurse, say I.

Nurse	Peace, I have done. God mark thee to his grace!
	Thou wast the prettiest babe that e'er I nursed:
	An I might live to see thee married once,
	I have my wish.

LADY CAPULET	Marry, that 'marry' is the very theme
	I came to talk of. Tell me, daughter Juliet,
	How stands your disposition to be married?

JULIET	It is an honour that I dream not of.

Nurse	An honour! were not I thine only nurse,
	I would say thou hadst suck'd wisdom from thy teat.

LADY CAPULET	Well, think of marriage now; younger than you,
	Here in Verona, ladies of esteem,
	Are made already mothers: by my count,
	I was your mother much upon these years
	That you are now a maid. Thus then in brief:
	The valiant Paris seeks you for his love.

Nurse	A man, young lady! lady, such a man
	As all the world--why, he's a man of wax.

LADY CAPULET	Verona's summer hath not such a flower.

Nurse	Nay, he's a flower; in faith, a very flower.

LADY CAPULET	What say you? can you love the gentleman?
	This night you shall behold him at our feast;
	Read o'er the volume of young Paris' face,
	And find delight writ there with beauty's pen;
	Examine every married lineament,
	And see how one another lends content
	And what obscured in this fair volume lies
	Find written in the margent of his eyes.
	This precious book of love, this unbound lover,
	To beautify him, only lacks a cover:
	The fish lives in the sea, and 'tis much pride
	For fair without the fair within to hide:
	That book in many's eyes doth share the glory,
	That in gold clasps locks in the golden story;
	So shall you share all that he doth possess,
	By having him, making yourself no less.

Nurse	No less! nay, bigger; women grow by men.

LADY CAPULET	Speak briefly, can you like of Paris' love?

JULIET	I'll look to like, if looking liking move:
	But no more deep will I endart mine eye
	Than your consent gives strength to make it fly.

	[Enter a Servant]

Servant	Madam, the guests are come, supper served up, you
	called, my young lady asked for, the nurse cursed in
	the pantry, and every thing in extremity. I must
	hence to wait; I beseech you, follow straight.

LADY CAPULET	We follow thee.

	[Exit Servant]

	Juliet, the county stays.

Nurse	Go, girl, seek happy nights to happy days.

	[Exeunt]




	ROMEO AND JULIET


ACT I



SCENE IV	A street.


	[Enter ROMEO, MERCUTIO, BENVOLIO, with five or six
	Maskers, Torch-bearers, and others]

ROMEO	What, shall this speech be spoke for our excuse?
	Or shall we on without a apology?

BENVOLIO	The date is out of such prolixity:
	We'll have no Cupid hoodwink'd with a scarf,
	Bearing a Tartar's painted bow of lath,
	Scaring the ladies like a crow-keeper;
	Nor no without-book prologue, faintly spoke
	After the prompter, for our entrance:
	But let them measure us by what they will;
	We'll measure them a measure, and be gone.

ROMEO	Give me a torch: I am not for this ambling;
	Being but heavy, I will bear the light.

MERCUTIO	Nay, gentle Romeo, we must have you dance.

ROMEO	Not I, believe me: you have dancing shoes
	With nimble soles: I have a soul of lead
	So stakes me to the ground I cannot move.

MERCUTIO	You are a lover; borrow Cupid's wings,
	And soar with them above a common bound.

ROMEO	I am too sore enpierced with his shaft
	To soar with his light feathers, and so bound,
	I cannot bound a pitch above dull woe:
	Under love's heavy burden do I sink.

MERCUTIO	And, to sink in it, should you burden love;
	Too great oppression for a tender thing.

ROMEO	Is love a tender thing? it is too rough,
	Too rude, too boisterous, and it pricks like thorn.

MERCUTIO	If love be rough with you, be rough with love;
	Prick love for pricking, and you beat love down.
	Give me a case to put my visage in:
	A visor for a visor! what care I
	What curious eye doth quote deformities?
	Here are the beetle brows shall blush for me.

BENVOLIO	Come, knock and enter; and no sooner in,
	But every man betake him to his legs.

ROMEO	A torch for me: let wantons light of heart
	Tickle the senseless rushes with their heels,
	For I am proverb'd with a grandsire phrase;
	I'll be a candle-holder, and look on.
	The game was ne'er so fair, and I am done.

MERCUTIO	Tut, dun's the mouse, the constable's own word:
	If thou art dun, we'll draw thee from the mire
	Of this sir-reverence love, wherein thou stick'st
	Up to the ears. Come, we burn daylight, ho!

ROMEO	Nay, that's not so.

MERCUTIO	I mean, sir, in delay
	We waste our lights in vain, like lamps by day.
	Take our good meaning, for our judgment sits
	Five times in that ere once in our five wits.

ROMEO	And we mean well in going to this mask;
	But 'tis no wit to go.

MERCUTIO	Why, may one ask?

ROMEO	I dream'd a dream to-night.

MERCUTIO	And so did I.

ROMEO	Well, what was yours?

MERCUTIO	That dreamers often lie.

ROMEO	In bed asleep, while they do dream things true.

MERCUTIO	O, then, I see Queen Mab hath been with you.
	She is the fairies' midwife, and she comes
	In shape no bigger than an agate-stone
	On the fore-finger of an alderman,
	Drawn with a team of little atomies
	Athwart men's noses as they lie asleep;
	Her wagon-spokes made of long spiders' legs,
	The cover of the wings of grasshoppers,
	The traces of the smallest spider's web,
	The collars of the moonshine's watery beams,
	Her whip of cricket's bone, the lash of film,
	Her wagoner a small grey-coated gnat,
	Not so big as a round little worm
	Prick'd from the lazy finger of a maid;
	Her chariot is an empty hazel-nut
	Made by the joiner squirrel or old grub,
	Time out o' mind the fairies' coachmakers.
	And in this state she gallops night by night
	Through lovers' brains, and then they dream of love;
	O'er courtiers' knees, that dream on court'sies straight,
	O'er lawyers' fingers, who straight dream on fees,
	O'er ladies ' lips, who straight on kisses dream,
	Which oft the angry Mab with blisters plagues,
	Because their breaths with sweetmeats tainted are:
	Sometime she gallops o'er a courtier's nose,
	And then dreams he of smelling out a suit;
	And sometime comes she with a tithe-pig's tail
	Tickling a parson's nose as a' lies asleep,
	Then dreams, he of another benefice:
	Sometime she driveth o'er a soldier's neck,
	And then dreams he of cutting foreign throats,
	Of breaches, ambuscadoes, Spanish blades,
	Of healths five-fathom deep; and then anon
	Drums in his ear, at which he starts and wakes,
	And being thus frighted swears a prayer or two
	And sleeps again. This is that very Mab
	That plats the manes of horses in the night,
	And bakes the elflocks in foul sluttish hairs,
	Which once untangled, much misfortune bodes:
	This is the hag, when maids lie on their backs,
	That presses them and learns them first to bear,
	Making them women of good carriage:
	This is she--

ROMEO	                  Peace, peace, Mercutio, peace!
	Thou talk'st of nothing.

MERCUTIO	True, I talk of dreams,
	Which are the children of an idle brain,
	Begot of nothing but vain fantasy,
	Which is as thin of substance as the air
	And more inconstant than the wind, who wooes
	Even now the frozen bosom of the north,
	And, being anger'd, puffs away from thence,
	Turning his face to the dew-dropping south.

BENVOLIO	This wind, you talk of, blows us from ourselves;
	Supper is done, and we shall come too late.

ROMEO	I fear, too early: for my mind misgives
	Some consequence yet hanging in the stars
	Shall bitterly begin his fearful date
	With this night's revels and expire the term
	Of a despised life closed in my breast
	By some vile forfeit of untimely death.
	But He, that hath the steerage of my course,
	Direct my sail! On, lusty gentlemen.

BENVOLIO	Strike, drum.

	[Exeunt]




	ROMEO AND JULIET


ACT I



SCENE V	A hall in Capulet's house.


	[Musicians waiting. Enter Servingmen with napkins]

First Servant	Where's Potpan, that he helps not to take away? He
	shift a trencher? he scrape a trencher!

Second Servant	When good manners shall lie all in one or two men's
	hands and they unwashed too, 'tis a foul thing.

First Servant	Away with the joint-stools, remove the
	court-cupboard, look to the plate. Good thou, save
	me a piece of marchpane; and, as thou lovest me, let
	the porter let in Susan Grindstone and Nell.
	Antony, and Potpan!

Second Servant	Ay, boy, ready.

First Servant	You are looked for and called for, asked for and
	sought for, in the great chamber.

Second Servant	We cannot be here and there too. Cheerly, boys; be
	brisk awhile, and the longer liver take all.

	[Enter CAPULET, with JULIET and others of his house,
	meeting the Guests and Maskers]

CAPULET	Welcome, gentlemen! ladies that have their toes
	Unplagued with corns will have a bout with you.
	Ah ha, my mistresses! which of you all
	Will now deny to dance? she that makes dainty,
	She, I'll swear, hath corns; am I come near ye now?
	Welcome, gentlemen! I have seen the day
	That I have worn a visor and could tell
	A whispering tale in a fair lady's ear,
	Such as would please: 'tis gone, 'tis gone, 'tis gone:
	You are welcome, gentlemen! come, musicians, play.
	A hall, a hall! give room! and foot it, girls.

	[Music plays, and they dance]

	More light, you knaves; and turn the tables up,
	And quench the fire, the room is grown too hot.
	Ah, sirrah, this unlook'd-for sport comes well.
	Nay, sit, nay, sit, good cousin Capulet;
	For you and I are past our dancing days:
	How long is't now since last yourself and I
	Were in a mask?

Second Capulet	                  By'r lady, thirty years.

CAPULET	What, man! 'tis not so much, 'tis not so much:
	'Tis since the nuptials of Lucentio,
	Come pentecost as quickly as it will,
	Some five and twenty years; and then we mask'd.

Second Capulet	'Tis more, 'tis more, his son is elder, sir;
	His son is thirty.

CAPULET	                  Will you tell me that?
	His son was but a ward two years ago.

ROMEO	[To a Servingman]  What lady is that, which doth
	enrich the hand
	Of yonder knight?

Servant	I know not, sir.

ROMEO	O, she doth teach the torches to burn bright!
	It seems she hangs upon the cheek of night
	Like a rich jewel in an Ethiope's ear;
	Beauty too rich for use, for earth too dear!
	So shows a snowy dove trooping with crows,
	As yonder lady o'er her fellows shows.
	The measure done, I'll watch her place of stand,
	And, touching hers, make blessed my rude hand.
	Did my heart love till now? forswear it, sight!
	For I ne'er saw true beauty till this night.

TYBALT	This, by his voice, should be a Montague.
	Fetch me my rapier, boy. What dares the slave
	Come hither, cover'd with an antic face,
	To fleer and scorn at our solemnity?
	Now, by the stock and honour of my kin,
	To strike him dead, I hold it not a sin.

CAPULET	Why, how now, kinsman! wherefore storm you so?

TYBALT	Uncle, this is a Montague, our foe,
	A villain that is hither come in spite,
	To scorn at our solemnity this night.

CAPULET	Young Romeo is it?

TYBALT	'Tis he, that villain Romeo.

CAPULET	Content thee, gentle coz, let him alone;
	He bears him like a portly gentleman;
	And, to say truth, Verona brags of him
	To be a virtuous and well-govern'd youth:
	I would not for the wealth of all the town
	Here in my house do him disparagement:
	Therefore be patient, take no note of him:
	It is my will, the which if thou respect,
	Show a fair presence and put off these frowns,
	And ill-beseeming semblance for a feast.

TYBALT	It fits, when such a villain is a guest:
	I'll not endure him.

CAPULET	He shall be endured:
	What, goodman boy! I say, he shall: go to;
	Am I the master here, or you? go to.
	You'll not endure him! God shall mend my soul!
	You'll make a mutiny among my guests!
	You will set cock-a-hoop! you'll be the man!

TYBALT	Why, uncle, 'tis a shame.

CAPULET	Go to, go to;
	You are a saucy boy: is't so, indeed?
	This trick may chance to scathe you, I know what:
	You must contrary me! marry, 'tis time.
	Well said, my hearts! You are a princox; go:
	Be quiet, or--More light, more light! For shame!
	I'll make you quiet. What, cheerly, my hearts!

TYBALT	Patience perforce with wilful choler meeting
	Makes my flesh tremble in their different greeting.
	I will withdraw: but this intrusion shall
	Now seeming sweet convert to bitter gall.

	[Exit]

ROMEO	[To JULIET]  If I profane with my unworthiest hand
	This holy shrine, the gentle fine is this:
	My lips, two blushing pilgrims, ready stand
	To smooth that rough touch with a tender kiss.

JULIET	Good pilgrim, you do wrong your hand too much,
	Which mannerly devotion shows in this;
	For saints have hands that pilgrims' hands do touch,
	And palm to palm is holy palmers' kiss.

ROMEO	Have not saints lips, and holy palmers too?

JULIET	Ay, pilgrim, lips that they must use in prayer.

ROMEO	O, then, dear saint, let lips do what hands do;
	They pray, grant thou, lest faith turn to despair.

JULIET	Saints do not move, though grant for prayers' sake.

ROMEO	Then move not, while my prayer's effect I take.
	Thus from my lips, by yours, my sin is purged.

JULIET	Then have my lips the sin that they have took.

ROMEO	Sin from thy lips? O trespass sweetly urged!
	Give me my sin again.

JULIET	You kiss by the book.

Nurse	Madam, your mother craves a word with you.

ROMEO	What is her mother?

Nurse	Marry, bachelor,
	Her mother is the lady of the house,
	And a good lady, and a wise and virtuous
	I nursed her daughter, that you talk'd withal;
	I tell you, he that can lay hold of her
	Shall have the chinks.

ROMEO	Is she a Capulet?
	O dear account! my life is my foe's debt.

BENVOLIO	Away, begone; the sport is at the best.

ROMEO	Ay, so I fear; the more is my unrest.

CAPULET	Nay, gentlemen, prepare not to be gone;
	We have a trifling foolish banquet towards.
	Is it e'en so? why, then, I thank you all
	I thank you, honest gentlemen; good night.
	More torches here! Come on then, let's to bed.
	Ah, sirrah, by my fay, it waxes late:
	I'll to my rest.

	[Exeunt all but JULIET and Nurse]

JULIET	Come hither, nurse. What is yond gentleman?

Nurse	The son and heir of old Tiberio.

JULIET	What's he that now is going out of door?

Nurse	Marry, that, I think, be young Petrucio.

JULIET	What's he that follows there, that would not dance?

Nurse	I know not.

JULIET	Go ask his name: if he be married.
	My grave is like to be my wedding bed.

Nurse	His name is Romeo, and a Montague;
	The only son of your great enemy.

JULIET	My only love sprung from my only hate!
	Too early seen unknown, and known too late!
	Prodigious birth of love it is to me,
	That I must love a loathed enemy.

Nurse	What's this? what's this?

JULIET	A rhyme I learn'd even now
	Of one I danced withal.

	[One calls within 'Juliet.']

Nurse	Anon, anon!
	Come, let's away; the strangers all are gone.

	[Exeunt]




	ROMEO AND JULIET


ACT II


	PROLOGUE


	[Enter Chorus]

Chorus	Now old desire doth in his death-bed lie,
	And young affection gapes to be his heir;
	That fair for which love groan'd for and would die,
	With tender Juliet match'd, is now not fair.
	Now Romeo is beloved and loves again,
	Alike betwitched by the charm of looks,
	But to his foe supposed he must complain,
	And she steal love's sweet bait from fearful hooks:
	Being held a foe, he may not have access
	To breathe such vows as lovers use to swear;
	And she as much in love, her means much less
	To meet her new-beloved any where:
	But passion lends them power, time means, to meet
	Tempering extremities with extreme sweet.

	[Exit]




	ROMEO AND JULIET


ACT II



SCENE I	A lane by the wall of Capulet's orchard.


	[Enter ROMEO]

ROMEO	Can I go forward when my heart is here?
	Turn back, dull earth, and find thy centre out.

	[He climbs the wall, and leaps down within it]

	[Enter BENVOLIO and MERCUTIO]

BENVOLIO	Romeo! my cousin Romeo!

MERCUTIO	He is wise;
	And, on my lie, hath stol'n him home to bed.

BENVOLIO	He ran this way, and leap'd this orchard wall:
	Call, good Mercutio.

MERCUTIO	Nay, I'll conjure too.
	Romeo! humours! madman! passion! lover!
	Appear thou in the likeness of a sigh:
	Speak but one rhyme, and I am satisfied;
	Cry but 'Ay me!' pronounce but 'love' and 'dove;'
	Speak to my gossip Venus one fair word,
	One nick-name for her purblind son and heir,
	Young Adam Cupid, he that shot so trim,
	When King Cophetua loved the beggar-maid!
	He heareth not, he stirreth not, he moveth not;
	The ape is dead, and I must conjure him.
	I conjure thee by Rosaline's bright eyes,
	By her high forehead and her scarlet lip,
	By her fine foot, straight leg and quivering thigh
	And the demesnes that there adjacent lie,
	That in thy likeness thou appear to us!

BENVOLIO	And if he hear thee, thou wilt anger him.

MERCUTIO	This cannot anger him: 'twould anger him
	To raise a spirit in his mistress' circle
	Of some strange nature, letting it there stand
	Till she had laid it and conjured it down;
	That were some spite: my invocation
	Is fair and honest, and in his mistress' name
	I conjure only but to raise up him.

BENVOLIO	Come, he hath hid himself among these trees,
	To be consorted with the humorous night:
	Blind is his love and best befits the dark.

MERCUTIO	If love be blind, love cannot hit the mark.
	Now will he sit under a medlar tree,
	And wish his mistress were that kind of fruit
	As maids call medlars, when they laugh alone.
	Romeo, that she were, O, that she were
	An open et caetera, thou a poperin pear!
	Romeo, good night: I'll to my truckle-bed;
	This field-bed is too cold for me to sleep:
	Come, shall we go?

BENVOLIO	                  Go, then; for 'tis in vain
	To seek him here that means not to be found.

	[Exeunt]




	ROMEO AND JULIET


ACT II



SCENE II	Capulet's orchard.


	[Enter ROMEO]

ROMEO	He jests at scars that never felt a wound.

	[JULIET appears above at a window]

	But, soft! what light through yonder window breaks?
	It is the east, and Juliet is the sun.
	Arise, fair sun, and kill the envious moon,
	Who is already sick and pale with grief,
	That thou her maid art far more fair than she:
	Be not her maid, since she is envious;
	Her vestal livery is but sick and green
	And none but fools do wear it; cast it off.
	It is my lady, O, it is my love!
	O, that she knew she were!
	She speaks yet she says nothing: what of that?
	Her eye discourses; I will answer it.
	I am too bold, 'tis not to me she speaks:
	Two of the fairest stars in all the heaven,
	Having some business, do entreat her eyes
	To twinkle in their spheres till they return.
	What if her eyes were there, they in her head?
	The brightness of her cheek would shame those stars,
	As daylight doth a lamp; her eyes in heaven
	Would through the airy region stream so bright
	That birds would sing and think it were not night.
	See, how she leans her cheek upon her hand!
	O, that I were a glove upon that hand,
	That I might touch that cheek!

JULIET	Ay me!

ROMEO	She speaks:
	O, speak again, bright angel! for thou art
	As glorious to this night, being o'er my head
	As is a winged messenger of heaven
	Unto the white-upturned wondering eyes
	Of mortals that fall back to gaze on him
	When he bestrides the lazy-pacing clouds
	And sails upon the bosom of the air.

JULIET	O Romeo, Romeo! wherefore art thou Romeo?
	Deny thy father and refuse thy name;
	Or, if thou wilt not, be but sworn my love,
	And I'll no longer be a Capulet.

ROMEO	[Aside]  Shall I hear more, or shall I speak at this?

JULIET	'Tis but thy name that is my enemy;
	Thou art thyself, though not a Montague.
	What's Montague? it is nor hand, nor foot,
	Nor arm, nor face, nor any other part
	Belonging to a man. O, be some other name!
	What's in a name? that which we call a rose
	By any other name would smell as sweet;
	So Romeo would, were he not Romeo call'd,
	Retain that dear perfection which he owes
	Without that title. Romeo, doff thy name,
	And for that name which is no part of thee
	Take all myself.

ROMEO	                  I take thee at thy word:
	Call me but love, and I'll be new baptized;
	Henceforth I never will be Romeo.

JULIET	What man art thou that thus bescreen'd in night
	So stumblest on my counsel?

ROMEO	By a name
	I know not how to tell thee who I am:
	My name, dear saint, is hateful to myself,
	Because it is an enemy to thee;
	Had I it written, I would tear the word.

JULIET	My ears have not yet drunk a hundred words
	Of that tongue's utterance, yet I know the sound:
	Art thou not Romeo and a Montague?

ROMEO	Neither, fair saint, if either thee dislike.

JULIET	How camest thou hither, tell me, and wherefore?
	The orchard walls are high and hard to climb,
	And the place death, considering who thou art,
	If any of my kinsmen find thee here.

ROMEO	With love's light wings did I o'er-perch these walls;
	For stony limits cannot hold love out,
	And what love can do that dares love attempt;
	Therefore thy kinsmen are no let to me.

JULIET	If they do see thee, they will murder thee.

ROMEO	Alack, there lies more peril in thine eye
	Than twenty of their swords: look thou but sweet,
	And I am proof against their enmity.

JULIET	I would not for the world they saw thee here.

ROMEO	I have night's cloak to hide me from their sight;
	And but thou love me, let them find me here:
	My life were better ended by their hate,
	Than death prorogued, wanting of thy love.

JULIET	By whose direction found'st thou out this place?

ROMEO	By love, who first did prompt me to inquire;
	He lent me counsel and I lent him eyes.
	I am no pilot; yet, wert thou as far
	As that vast shore wash'd with the farthest sea,
	I would adventure for such merchandise.

JULIET	Thou know'st the mask of night is on my face,
	Else would a maiden blush bepaint my cheek
	For that which thou hast heard me speak to-night
	Fain would I dwell on form, fain, fain deny
	What I have spoke: but farewell compliment!
	Dost thou love me? I know thou wilt say 'Ay,'
	And I will take thy word: yet if thou swear'st,
	Thou mayst prove false; at lovers' perjuries
	Then say, Jove laughs. O gentle Romeo,
	If thou dost love, pronounce it faithfully:
	Or if thou think'st I am too quickly won,
	I'll frown and be perverse an say thee nay,
	So thou wilt woo; but else, not for the world.
	In truth, fair Montague, I am too fond,
	And therefore thou mayst think my 'havior light:
	But trust me, gentleman, I'll prove more true
	Than those that have more cunning to be strange.
	I should have been more strange, I must confess,
	But that thou overheard'st, ere I was ware,
	My true love's passion: therefore pardon me,
	And not impute this yielding to light love,
	Which the dark night hath so discovered.

ROMEO	Lady, by yonder blessed moon I swear
	That tips with silver all these fruit-tree tops--

JULIET	O, swear not by the moon, the inconstant moon,
	That monthly changes in her circled orb,
	Lest that thy love prove likewise variable.

ROMEO	What shall I swear by?

JULIET	Do not swear at all;
	Or, if thou wilt, swear by thy gracious self,
	Which is the god of my idolatry,
	And I'll believe thee.

ROMEO	If my heart's dear love--

JULIET	Well, do not swear: although I joy in thee,
	I have no joy of this contract to-night:
	It is too rash, too unadvised, too sudden;
	Too like the lightning, which doth cease to be
	Ere one can say 'It lightens.' Sweet, good night!
	This bud of love, by summer's ripening breath,
	May prove a beauteous flower when next we meet.
	Good night, good night! as sweet repose and rest
	Come to thy heart as that within my breast!

ROMEO	O, wilt thou leave me so unsatisfied?

JULIET	What satisfaction canst thou have to-night?

ROMEO	The exchange of thy love's faithful vow for mine.

JULIET	I gave thee mine before thou didst request it:
	And yet I would it were to give again.

ROMEO	Wouldst thou withdraw it? for what purpose, love?

JULIET	But to be frank, and give it thee again.
	And yet I wish but for the thing I have:
	My bounty is as boundless as the sea,
	My love as deep; the more I give to thee,
	The more I have, for both are infinite.

	[Nurse calls within]

	I hear some noise within; dear love, adieu!
	Anon, good nurse! Sweet Montague, be true.
	Stay but a little, I will come again.

	[Exit, above]

ROMEO	O blessed, blessed night! I am afeard.
	Being in night, all this is but a dream,
	Too flattering-sweet to be substantial.

	[Re-enter JULIET, above]

JULIET	Three words, dear Romeo, and good night indeed.
	If that thy bent of love be honourable,
	Thy purpose marriage, send me word to-morrow,
	By one that I'll procure to come to thee,
	Where and what time thou wilt perform the rite;
	And all my fortunes at thy foot I'll lay
	And follow thee my lord throughout the world.

Nurse	[Within]  Madam!

JULIET	I come, anon.--But if thou mean'st not well,
	I do beseech thee--

Nurse	[Within]  Madam!

JULIET	By and by, I come:--
	To cease thy suit, and leave me to my grief:
	To-morrow will I send.

ROMEO	So thrive my soul--

JULIET	A thousand times good night!

	[Exit, above]

ROMEO	A thousand times the worse, to want thy light.
	Love goes toward love, as schoolboys from
	their books,
	But love from love, toward school with heavy looks.

	[Retiring]

	[Re-enter JULIET, above]

JULIET	Hist! Romeo, hist! O, for a falconer's voice,
	To lure this tassel-gentle back again!
	Bondage is hoarse, and may not speak aloud;
	Else would I tear the cave where Echo lies,
	And make her airy tongue more hoarse than mine,
	With repetition of my Romeo's name.

ROMEO	It is my soul that calls upon my name:
	How silver-sweet sound lovers' tongues by night,
	Like softest music to attending ears!

JULIET	Romeo!

ROMEO	     My dear?

JULIET	                  At what o'clock to-morrow
	Shall I send to thee?

ROMEO	At the hour of nine.

JULIET	I will not fail: 'tis twenty years till then.
	I have forgot why I did call thee back.

ROMEO	Let me stand here till thou remember it.

JULIET	I shall forget, to have thee still stand there,
	Remembering how I love thy company.

ROMEO	And I'll still stay, to have thee still forget,
	Forgetting any other home but this.

JULIET	'Tis almost morning; I would have thee gone:
	And yet no further than a wanton's bird;
	Who lets it hop a little from her hand,
	Like a poor prisoner in his twisted gyves,
	And with a silk thread plucks it back again,
	So loving-jealous of his liberty.

ROMEO	I would I were thy bird.

JULIET	Sweet, so would I:
	Yet I should kill thee with much cherishing.
	Good night, good night! parting is such
	sweet sorrow,
	That I shall say good night till it be morrow.

	[Exit above]

ROMEO	Sleep dwell upon thine eyes, peace in thy breast!
	Would I were sleep and peace, so sweet to rest!
	Hence will I to my ghostly father's cell,
	His help to crave, and my dear hap to tell.

	[Exit]




	ROMEO AND JULIET


ACT II



SCENE III	Friar Laurence's cell.


	[Enter FRIAR LAURENCE, with a basket]

FRIAR LAURENCE	The grey-eyed morn smiles on the frowning night,
	Chequering the eastern clouds with streaks of light,
	And flecked darkness like a drunkard reels
	From forth day's path and Titan's fiery wheels:
	Now, ere the sun advance his burning eye,
	The day to cheer and night's dank dew to dry,
	I must up-fill this osier cage of ours
	With baleful weeds and precious-juiced flowers.
	The earth that's nature's mother is her tomb;
	What is her burying grave that is her womb,
	And from her womb children of divers kind
	We sucking on her natural bosom find,
	Many for many virtues excellent,
	None but for some and yet all different.
	O, mickle is the powerful grace that lies
	In herbs, plants, stones, and their true qualities:
	For nought so vile that on the earth doth live
	But to the earth some special good doth give,
	Nor aught so good but strain'd from that fair use
	Revolts from true birth, stumbling on abuse:
	Virtue itself turns vice, being misapplied;
	And vice sometimes by action dignified.
	Within the infant rind of this small flower
	Poison hath residence and medicine power:
	For this, being smelt, with that part cheers each part;
	Being tasted, slays all senses with the heart.
	Two such opposed kings encamp them still
	In man as well as herbs, grace and rude will;
	And where the worser is predominant,
	Full soon the canker death eats up that plant.

	[Enter ROMEO]

ROMEO	Good morrow, father.

FRIAR LAURENCE	Benedicite!
	What early tongue so sweet saluteth me?
	Young son, it argues a distemper'd head
	So soon to bid good morrow to thy bed:
	Care keeps his watch in every old man's eye,
	And where care lodges, sleep will never lie;
	But where unbruised youth with unstuff'd brain
	Doth couch his limbs, there golden sleep doth reign:
	Therefore thy earliness doth me assure
	Thou art up-roused by some distemperature;
	Or if not so, then here I hit it right,
	Our Romeo hath not been in bed to-night.

ROMEO	That last is true; the sweeter rest was mine.

FRIAR LAURENCE	God pardon sin! wast thou with Rosaline?

ROMEO	With Rosaline, my ghostly father? no;
	I have forgot that name, and that name's woe.

FRIAR LAURENCE	That's my good son: but where hast thou been, then?

ROMEO	I'll tell thee, ere thou ask it me again.
	I have been feasting with mine enemy,
	Where on a sudden one hath wounded me,
	That's by me wounded: both our remedies
	Within thy help and holy physic lies:
	I bear no hatred, blessed man, for, lo,
	My intercession likewise steads my foe.

FRIAR LAURENCE	Be plain, good son, and homely in thy drift;
	Riddling confession finds but riddling shrift.

ROMEO	Then plainly know my heart's dear love is set
	On the fair daughter of rich Capulet:
	As mine on hers, so hers is set on mine;
	And all combined, save what thou must combine
	By holy marriage: when and where and how
	We met, we woo'd and made exchange of vow,
	I'll tell thee as we pass; but this I pray,
	That thou consent to marry us to-day.

FRIAR LAURENCE	Holy Saint Francis, what a change is here!
	Is Rosaline, whom thou didst love so dear,
	So soon forsaken? young men's love then lies
	Not truly in their hearts, but in their eyes.
	Jesu Maria, what a deal of brine
	Hath wash'd thy sallow cheeks for Rosaline!
	How much salt water thrown away in waste,
	To season love, that of it doth not taste!
	The sun not yet thy sighs from heaven clears,
	Thy old groans ring yet in my ancient ears;
	Lo, here upon thy cheek the stain doth sit
	Of an old tear that is not wash'd off yet:
	If e'er thou wast thyself and these woes thine,
	Thou and these woes were all for Rosaline:
	And art thou changed? pronounce this sentence then,
	Women may fall, when there's no strength in men.

ROMEO	Thou chid'st me oft for loving Rosaline.

FRIAR LAURENCE	For doting, not for loving, pupil mine.

ROMEO	And bad'st me bury love.

FRIAR LAURENCE	Not in a grave,
	To lay one in, another out to have.

ROMEO	I pray thee, chide not; she whom I love now
	Doth grace for grace and love for love allow;
	The other did not so.

FRIAR LAURENCE	O, she knew well
	Thy love did read by rote and could not spell.
	But come, young waverer, come, go with me,
	In one respect I'll thy assistant be;
	For this alliance may so happy prove,
	To turn your households' rancour to pure love.

ROMEO	O, let us hence; I stand on sudden haste.

FRIAR LAURENCE	Wisely and slow; they stumble that run fast.

	[Exeunt]




	ROMEO AND JULIET


ACT II



SCENE IV	A street.


	[Enter BENVOLIO and MERCUTIO]

MERCUTIO	Where the devil should this Romeo be?
	Came he not home to-night?

BENVOLIO	Not to his father's; I spoke with his man.

MERCUTIO	Ah, that same pale hard-hearted wench, that Rosaline.
	Torments him so, that he will sure run mad.

BENVOLIO	Tybalt, the kinsman of old Capulet,
	Hath sent a letter to his father's house.

MERCUTIO	A challenge, on my life.

BENVOLIO	Romeo will answer it.

MERCUTIO	Any man that can write may answer a letter.

BENVOLIO	Nay, he will answer the letter's master, how he
	dares, being dared.

MERCUTIO	Alas poor Romeo! he is already dead; stabbed with a
	white wench's black eye; shot through the ear with a
	love-song; the very pin of his heart cleft with the
	blind bow-boy's butt-shaft: and is he a man to
	encounter Tybalt?

BENVOLIO	Why, what is Tybalt?

MERCUTIO	More than prince of cats, I can tell you. O, he is
	the courageous captain of compliments. He fights as
	you sing prick-song, keeps time, distance, and
	proportion; rests me his minim rest, one, two, and
	the third in your bosom: the very butcher of a silk
	button, a duellist, a duellist; a gentleman of the
	very first house, of the first and second cause:
	ah, the immortal passado! the punto reverso! the
	hai!

BENVOLIO	The what?

MERCUTIO	The pox of such antic, lisping, affecting
	fantasticoes; these new tuners of accents! 'By Jesu,
	a very good blade! a very tall man! a very good
	whore!' Why, is not this a lamentable thing,
	grandsire, that we should be thus afflicted with
	these strange flies, these fashion-mongers, these
	perdona-mi's, who stand so much on the new form,
	that they cannot at ease on the old bench? O, their
	bones, their bones!

	[Enter ROMEO]

BENVOLIO	Here comes Romeo, here comes Romeo.

MERCUTIO	Without his roe, like a dried herring: flesh, flesh,
	how art thou fishified! Now is he for the numbers
	that Petrarch flowed in: Laura to his lady was but a
	kitchen-wench; marry, she had a better love to
	be-rhyme her; Dido a dowdy; Cleopatra a gipsy;
	Helen and Hero hildings and harlots; Thisbe a grey
	eye or so, but not to the purpose. Signior
	Romeo, bon jour! there's a French salutation
	to your French slop. You gave us the counterfeit
	fairly last night.

ROMEO	Good morrow to you both. What counterfeit did I give you?

MERCUTIO	The ship, sir, the slip; can you not conceive?

ROMEO	Pardon, good Mercutio, my business was great; and in
	such a case as mine a man may strain courtesy.

MERCUTIO	That's as much as to say, such a case as yours
	constrains a man to bow in the hams.

ROMEO	Meaning, to court'sy.

MERCUTIO	Thou hast most kindly hit it.

ROMEO	A most courteous exposition.

MERCUTIO	Nay, I am the very pink of courtesy.

ROMEO	Pink for flower.

MERCUTIO	Right.

ROMEO	Why, then is my pump well flowered.

MERCUTIO	Well said: follow me this jest now till thou hast
	worn out thy pump, that when the single sole of it
	is worn, the jest may remain after the wearing sole singular.

ROMEO	O single-soled jest, solely singular for the
	singleness.

MERCUTIO	Come between us, good Benvolio; my wits faint.

ROMEO	Switch and spurs, switch and spurs; or I'll cry a match.

MERCUTIO	Nay, if thy wits run the wild-goose chase, I have
	done, for thou hast more of the wild-goose in one of
	thy wits than, I am sure, I have in my whole five:
	was I with you there for the goose?

ROMEO	Thou wast never with me for any thing when thou wast
	not there for the goose.

MERCUTIO	I will bite thee by the ear for that jest.

ROMEO	Nay, good goose, bite not.

MERCUTIO	Thy wit is a very bitter sweeting; it is a most
	sharp sauce.

ROMEO	And is it not well served in to a sweet goose?

MERCUTIO	O here's a wit of cheveril, that stretches from an
	inch narrow to an ell broad!

ROMEO	I stretch it out for that word 'broad;' which added
	to the goose, proves thee far and wide a broad goose.

MERCUTIO	Why, is not this better now than groaning for love?
	now art thou sociable, now art thou Romeo; now art
	thou what thou art, by art as well as by nature:
	for this drivelling love is like a great natural,
	that runs lolling up and down to hide his bauble in a hole.

BENVOLIO	Stop there, stop there.

MERCUTIO	Thou desirest me to stop in my tale against the hair.

BENVOLIO	Thou wouldst else have made thy tale large.

MERCUTIO	O, thou art deceived; I would have made it short:
	for I was come to the whole depth of my tale; and
	meant, indeed, to occupy the argument no longer.

ROMEO	Here's goodly gear!

	[Enter Nurse and PETER]

MERCUTIO	A sail, a sail!

BENVOLIO	Two, two; a shirt and a smock.

Nurse	Peter!

PETER	Anon!

Nurse	My fan, Peter.

MERCUTIO	Good Peter, to hide her face; for her fan's the
	fairer face.

Nurse	God ye good morrow, gentlemen.

MERCUTIO	God ye good den, fair gentlewoman.

Nurse	Is it good den?

MERCUTIO	'Tis no less, I tell you, for the bawdy hand of the
	dial is now upon the prick of noon.

Nurse	Out upon you! what a man are you!

ROMEO	One, gentlewoman, that God hath made for himself to
	mar.

Nurse	By my troth, it is well said; 'for himself to mar,'
	quoth a'? Gentlemen, can any of you tell me where I
	may find the young Romeo?

ROMEO	I can tell you; but young Romeo will be older when
	you have found him than he was when you sought him:
	I am the youngest of that name, for fault of a worse.

Nurse	You say well.

MERCUTIO	Yea, is the worst well? very well took, i' faith;
	wisely, wisely.

Nurse	if you be he, sir, I desire some confidence with
	you.

BENVOLIO	She will indite him to some supper.

MERCUTIO	A bawd, a bawd, a bawd! so ho!

ROMEO	What hast thou found?

MERCUTIO	No hare, sir; unless a hare, sir, in a lenten pie,
	that is something stale and hoar ere it be spent.

	[Sings]

	An old hare hoar,
	And an old hare hoar,
	Is very good meat in lent
	But a hare that is hoar
	Is too much for a score,
	When it hoars ere it be spent.
	Romeo, will you come to your father's? we'll
	to dinner, thither.

ROMEO	I will follow you.

MERCUTIO	Farewell, ancient lady; farewell,

	[Singing]

	'lady, lady, lady.'

	[Exeunt MERCUTIO and BENVOLIO]

Nurse	Marry, farewell! I pray you, sir, what saucy
	merchant was this, that was so full of his ropery?

ROMEO	A gentleman, nurse, that loves to hear himself talk,
	and will speak more in a minute than he will stand
	to in a month.

Nurse	An a' speak any thing against me, I'll take him
	down, an a' were lustier than he is, and twenty such
	Jacks; and if I cannot, I'll find those that shall.
	Scurvy knave! I am none of his flirt-gills; I am
	none of his skains-mates. And thou must stand by
	too, and suffer every knave to use me at his pleasure?

PETER	I saw no man use you a pleasure; if I had, my weapon
	should quickly have been out, I warrant you: I dare
	draw as soon as another man, if I see occasion in a
	good quarrel, and the law on my side.

Nurse	Now, afore God, I am so vexed, that every part about
	me quivers. Scurvy knave! Pray you, sir, a word:
	and as I told you, my young lady bade me inquire you
	out; what she bade me say, I will keep to myself:
	but first let me tell ye, if ye should lead her into
	a fool's paradise, as they say, it were a very gross
	kind of behavior, as they say: for the gentlewoman
	is young; and, therefore, if you should deal double
	with her, truly it were an ill thing to be offered
	to any gentlewoman, and very weak dealing.

ROMEO	Nurse, commend me to thy lady and mistress. I
	protest unto thee--

Nurse	Good heart, and, i' faith, I will tell her as much:
	Lord, Lord, she will be a joyful woman.

ROMEO	What wilt thou tell her, nurse? thou dost not mark me.

Nurse	I will tell her, sir, that you do protest; which, as
	I take it, is a gentlemanlike offer.

ROMEO	Bid her devise
	Some means to come to shrift this afternoon;
	And there she shall at Friar Laurence' cell
	Be shrived and married. Here is for thy pains.

Nurse	No truly sir; not a penny.

ROMEO	Go to; I say you shall.

Nurse	This afternoon, sir? well, she shall be there.

ROMEO	And stay, good nurse, behind the abbey wall:
	Within this hour my man shall be with thee
	And bring thee cords made like a tackled stair;
	Which to the high top-gallant of my joy
	Must be my convoy in the secret night.
	Farewell; be trusty, and I'll quit thy pains:
	Farewell; commend me to thy mistress.

Nurse	Now God in heaven bless thee! Hark you, sir.

ROMEO	What say'st thou, my dear nurse?

Nurse	Is your man secret? Did you ne'er hear say,
	Two may keep counsel, putting one away?

ROMEO	I warrant thee, my man's as true as steel.

NURSE	Well, sir; my mistress is the sweetest lady--Lord,
	Lord! when 'twas a little prating thing:--O, there
	is a nobleman in town, one Paris, that would fain
	lay knife aboard; but she, good soul, had as lief
	see a toad, a very toad, as see him. I anger her
	sometimes and tell her that Paris is the properer
	man; but, I'll warrant you, when I say so, she looks
	as pale as any clout in the versal world. Doth not
	rosemary and Romeo begin both with a letter?

ROMEO	Ay, nurse; what of that? both with an R.

Nurse	Ah. mocker! that's the dog's name; R is for
	the--No; I know it begins with some other
	letter:--and she hath the prettiest sententious of
	it, of you and rosemary, that it would do you good
	to hear it.

ROMEO	Commend me to thy lady.

Nurse	Ay, a thousand times.

	[Exit Romeo]
	Peter!

PETER	Anon!

Nurse	Peter, take my fan, and go before and apace.

	[Exeunt]




	ROMEO AND JULIET


ACT II



SCENE V	Capulet's orchard.


	[Enter JULIET]

JULIET	The clock struck nine when I did send the nurse;
	In half an hour she promised to return.
	Perchance she cannot meet him: that's not so.
	O, she is lame! love's heralds should be thoughts,
	Which ten times faster glide than the sun's beams,
	Driving back shadows over louring hills:
	Therefore do nimble-pinion'd doves draw love,
	And therefore hath the wind-swift Cupid wings.
	Now is the sun upon the highmost hill
	Of this day's journey, and from nine till twelve
	Is three long hours, yet she is not come.
	Had she affections and warm youthful blood,
	She would be as swift in motion as a ball;
	My words would bandy her to my sweet love,
	And his to me:
	But old folks, many feign as they were dead;
	Unwieldy, slow, heavy and pale as lead.
	O God, she comes!

	[Enter Nurse and PETER]

	O honey nurse, what news?
	Hast thou met with him? Send thy man away.

Nurse	Peter, stay at the gate.

	[Exit PETER]

JULIET	Now, good sweet nurse,--O Lord, why look'st thou sad?
	Though news be sad, yet tell them merrily;
	If good, thou shamest the music of sweet news
	By playing it to me with so sour a face.

Nurse	I am a-weary, give me leave awhile:
	Fie, how my bones ache! what a jaunt have I had!

JULIET	I would thou hadst my bones, and I thy news:
	Nay, come, I pray thee, speak; good, good nurse, speak.

Nurse	Jesu, what haste? can you not stay awhile?
	Do you not see that I am out of breath?

JULIET	How art thou out of breath, when thou hast breath
	To say to me that thou art out of breath?
	The excuse that thou dost make in this delay
	Is longer than the tale thou dost excuse.
	Is thy news good, or bad? answer to that;
	Say either, and I'll stay the circumstance:
	Let me be satisfied, is't good or bad?

Nurse	Well, you have made a simple choice; you know not
	how to choose a man: Romeo! no, not he; though his
	face be better than any man's, yet his leg excels
	all men's; and for a hand, and a foot, and a body,
	though they be not to be talked on, yet they are
	past compare: he is not the flower of courtesy,
	but, I'll warrant him, as gentle as a lamb. Go thy
	ways, wench; serve God. What, have you dined at home?

JULIET	No, no: but all this did I know before.
	What says he of our marriage? what of that?

Nurse	Lord, how my head aches! what a head have I!
	It beats as it would fall in twenty pieces.
	My back o' t' other side,--O, my back, my back!
	Beshrew your heart for sending me about,
	To catch my death with jaunting up and down!

JULIET	I' faith, I am sorry that thou art not well.
	Sweet, sweet, sweet nurse, tell me, what says my love?

Nurse	Your love says, like an honest gentleman, and a
	courteous, and a kind, and a handsome, and, I
	warrant, a virtuous,--Where is your mother?

JULIET	Where is my mother! why, she is within;
	Where should she be? How oddly thou repliest!
	'Your love says, like an honest gentleman,
	Where is your mother?'

Nurse	O God's lady dear!
	Are you so hot? marry, come up, I trow;
	Is this the poultice for my aching bones?
	Henceforward do your messages yourself.

JULIET	Here's such a coil! come, what says Romeo?

Nurse	Have you got leave to go to shrift to-day?

JULIET	I have.

Nurse	Then hie you hence to Friar Laurence' cell;
	There stays a husband to make you a wife:
	Now comes the wanton blood up in your cheeks,
	They'll be in scarlet straight at any news.
	Hie you to church; I must another way,
	To fetch a ladder, by the which your love
	Must climb a bird's nest soon when it is dark:
	I am the drudge and toil in your delight,
	But you shall bear the burden soon at night.
	Go; I'll to dinner: hie you to the cell.

JULIET	Hie to high fortune! Honest nurse, farewell.

	[Exeunt]




	ROMEO AND JULIET


ACT II



SCENE VI	Friar Laurence's cell.


	[Enter FRIAR LAURENCE and ROMEO]

FRIAR LAURENCE	So smile the heavens upon this holy act,
	That after hours with sorrow chide us not!

ROMEO	Amen, amen! but come what sorrow can,
	It cannot countervail the exchange of joy
	That one short minute gives me in her sight:
	Do thou but close our hands with holy words,
	Then love-devouring death do what he dare;
	It is enough I may but call her mine.

FRIAR LAURENCE	These violent delights have violent ends
	And in their triumph die, like fire and powder,
	Which as they kiss consume: the sweetest honey
	Is loathsome in his own deliciousness
	And in the taste confounds the appetite:
	Therefore love moderately; long love doth so;
	Too swift arrives as tardy as too slow.

	[Enter JULIET]

	Here comes the lady: O, so light a foot
	Will ne'er wear out the everlasting flint:
	A lover may bestride the gossamer
	That idles in the wanton summer air,
	And yet not fall; so light is vanity.

JULIET	Good even to my ghostly confessor.

FRIAR LAURENCE	Romeo shall thank thee, daughter, for us both.

JULIET	As much to him, else is his thanks too much.

ROMEO	Ah, Juliet, if the measure of thy joy
	Be heap'd like mine and that thy skill be more
	To blazon it, then sweeten with thy breath
	This neighbour air, and let rich music's tongue
	Unfold the imagined happiness that both
	Receive in either by this dear encounter.

JULIET	Conceit, more rich in matter than in words,
	Brags of his substance, not of ornament:
	They are but beggars that can count their worth;
	But my true love is grown to such excess
	I cannot sum up sum of half my wealth.

FRIAR LAURENCE	Come, come with me, and we will make short work;
	For, by your leaves, you shall not stay alone
	Till holy church incorporate two in one.

	[Exeunt]




	ROMEO AND JULIET


ACT III



SCENE I	A public place.


	[Enter MERCUTIO, BENVOLIO, Page, and Servants]

BENVOLIO	I pray thee, good Mercutio, let's retire:
	The day is hot, the Capulets abroad,
	And, if we meet, we shall not scape a brawl;
	For now, these hot days, is the mad blood stirring.

MERCUTIO	Thou art like one of those fellows that when he
	enters the confines of a tavern claps me his sword
	upon the table and says 'God send me no need of
	thee!' and by the operation of the second cup draws
	it on the drawer, when indeed there is no need.

BENVOLIO	Am I like such a fellow?

MERCUTIO	Come, come, thou art as hot a Jack in thy mood as
	any in Italy, and as soon moved to be moody, and as
	soon moody to be moved.

BENVOLIO	And what to?

MERCUTIO	Nay, an there were two such, we should have none
	shortly, for one would kill the other. Thou! why,
	thou wilt quarrel with a man that hath a hair more,
	or a hair less, in his beard, than thou hast: thou
	wilt quarrel with a man for cracking nuts, having no
	other reason but because thou hast hazel eyes: what
	eye but such an eye would spy out such a quarrel?
	Thy head is as fun of quarrels as an egg is full of
	meat, and yet thy head hath been beaten as addle as
	an egg for quarrelling: thou hast quarrelled with a
	man for coughing in the street, because he hath
	wakened thy dog that hath lain asleep in the sun:
	didst thou not fall out with a tailor for wearing
	his new doublet before Easter? with another, for
	tying his new shoes with old riband? and yet thou
	wilt tutor me from quarrelling!

BENVOLIO	An I were so apt to quarrel as thou art, any man
	should buy the fee-simple of my life for an hour and a quarter.

MERCUTIO	The fee-simple! O simple!

BENVOLIO	By my head, here come the Capulets.

MERCUTIO	By my heel, I care not.

	[Enter TYBALT and others]

TYBALT	Follow me close, for I will speak to them.
	Gentlemen, good den: a word with one of you.

MERCUTIO	And but one word with one of us? couple it with
	something; make it a word and a blow.

TYBALT	You shall find me apt enough to that, sir, an you
	will give me occasion.

MERCUTIO	Could you not take some occasion without giving?

TYBALT	Mercutio, thou consort'st with Romeo,--

MERCUTIO	Consort! what, dost thou make us minstrels? an
	thou make minstrels of us, look to hear nothing but
	discords: here's my fiddlestick; here's that shall
	make you dance. 'Zounds, consort!

BENVOLIO	We talk here in the public haunt of men:
	Either withdraw unto some private place,
	And reason coldly of your grievances,
	Or else depart; here all eyes gaze on us.

MERCUTIO	Men's eyes were made to look, and let them gaze;
	I will not budge for no man's pleasure, I.

	[Enter ROMEO]

TYBALT	Well, peace be with you, sir: here comes my man.

MERCUTIO	But I'll be hanged, sir, if he wear your livery:
	Marry, go before to field, he'll be your follower;
	Your worship in that sense may call him 'man.'

TYBALT	Romeo, the hate I bear thee can afford
	No better term than this,--thou art a villain.

ROMEO	Tybalt, the reason that I have to love thee
	Doth much excuse the appertaining rage
	To such a greeting: villain am I none;
	Therefore farewell; I see thou know'st me not.

TYBALT	Boy, this shall not excuse the injuries
	That thou hast done me; therefore turn and draw.

ROMEO	I do protest, I never injured thee,
	But love thee better than thou canst devise,
	Till thou shalt know the reason of my love:
	And so, good Capulet,--which name I tender
	As dearly as my own,--be satisfied.

MERCUTIO	O calm, dishonourable, vile submission!
	Alla stoccata carries it away.

	[Draws]

	Tybalt, you rat-catcher, will you walk?

TYBALT	What wouldst thou have with me?

MERCUTIO	Good king of cats, nothing but one of your nine
	lives; that I mean to make bold withal, and as you
	shall use me hereafter, drybeat the rest of the
	eight. Will you pluck your sword out of his pitcher
	by the ears? make haste, lest mine be about your
	ears ere it be out.

TYBALT	I am for you.

	[Drawing]

ROMEO	Gentle Mercutio, put thy rapier up.

MERCUTIO	Come, sir, your passado.

	[They fight]

ROMEO	Draw, Benvolio; beat down their weapons.
	Gentlemen, for shame, forbear this outrage!
	Tybalt, Mercutio, the prince expressly hath
	Forbidden bandying in Verona streets:
	Hold, Tybalt! good Mercutio!

	[TYBALT under ROMEO's arm stabs MERCUTIO, and flies
	with his followers]

MERCUTIO	I am hurt.
	A plague o' both your houses! I am sped.
	Is he gone, and hath nothing?

BENVOLIO	What, art thou hurt?

MERCUTIO	Ay, ay, a scratch, a scratch; marry, 'tis enough.
	Where is my page? Go, villain, fetch a surgeon.

	[Exit Page]

ROMEO	Courage, man; the hurt cannot be much.

MERCUTIO	No, 'tis not so deep as a well, nor so wide as a
	church-door; but 'tis enough,'twill serve: ask for
	me to-morrow, and you shall find me a grave man. I
	am peppered, I warrant, for this world. A plague o'
	both your houses! 'Zounds, a dog, a rat, a mouse, a
	cat, to scratch a man to death! a braggart, a
	rogue, a villain, that fights by the book of
	arithmetic! Why the devil came you between us? I
	was hurt under your arm.

ROMEO	I thought all for the best.

MERCUTIO	Help me into some house, Benvolio,
	Or I shall faint. A plague o' both your houses!
	They have made worms' meat of me: I have it,
	And soundly too: your houses!

	[Exeunt MERCUTIO and BENVOLIO]

ROMEO	This gentleman, the prince's near ally,
	My very friend, hath got his mortal hurt
	In my behalf; my reputation stain'd
	With Tybalt's slander,--Tybalt, that an hour
	Hath been my kinsman! O sweet Juliet,
	Thy beauty hath made me effeminate
	And in my temper soften'd valour's steel!

	[Re-enter BENVOLIO]

BENVOLIO	O Romeo, Romeo, brave Mercutio's dead!
	That gallant spirit hath aspired the clouds,
	Which too untimely here did scorn the earth.

ROMEO	This day's black fate on more days doth depend;
	This but begins the woe, others must end.

BENVOLIO	Here comes the furious Tybalt back again.

ROMEO	Alive, in triumph! and Mercutio slain!
	Away to heaven, respective lenity,
	And fire-eyed fury be my conduct now!

	[Re-enter TYBALT]

	Now, Tybalt, take the villain back again,
	That late thou gavest me; for Mercutio's soul
	Is but a little way above our heads,
	Staying for thine to keep him company:
	Either thou, or I, or both, must go with him.

TYBALT	Thou, wretched boy, that didst consort him here,
	Shalt with him hence.

ROMEO	This shall determine that.

	[They fight; TYBALT falls]

BENVOLIO	Romeo, away, be gone!
	The citizens are up, and Tybalt slain.
	Stand not amazed: the prince will doom thee death,
	If thou art taken: hence, be gone, away!

ROMEO	O, I am fortune's fool!

BENVOLIO	Why dost thou stay?

	[Exit ROMEO]

	[Enter Citizens, &c]

First Citizen	Which way ran he that kill'd Mercutio?
	Tybalt, that murderer, which way ran he?

BENVOLIO	There lies that Tybalt.

First Citizen	Up, sir, go with me;
	I charge thee in the princes name, obey.

	[Enter Prince, attended; MONTAGUE, CAPULET, their
	Wives, and others]

PRINCE	Where are the vile beginners of this fray?

BENVOLIO	O noble prince, I can discover all
	The unlucky manage of this fatal brawl:
	There lies the man, slain by young Romeo,
	That slew thy kinsman, brave Mercutio.

LADY CAPULET	Tybalt, my cousin! O my brother's child!
	O prince! O cousin! husband! O, the blood is spilt
	O my dear kinsman! Prince, as thou art true,
	For blood of ours, shed blood of Montague.
	O cousin, cousin!

PRINCE	Benvolio, who began this bloody fray?

BENVOLIO	Tybalt, here slain, whom Romeo's hand did slay;
	Romeo that spoke him fair, bade him bethink
	How nice the quarrel was, and urged withal
	Your high displeasure: all this uttered
	With gentle breath, calm look, knees humbly bow'd,
	Could not take truce with the unruly spleen
	Of Tybalt deaf to peace, but that he tilts
	With piercing steel at bold Mercutio's breast,
	Who all as hot, turns deadly point to point,
	And, with a martial scorn, with one hand beats
	Cold death aside, and with the other sends
	It back to Tybalt, whose dexterity,
	Retorts it: Romeo he cries aloud,
	'Hold, friends! friends, part!' and, swifter than
	his tongue,
	His agile arm beats down their fatal points,
	And 'twixt them rushes; underneath whose arm
	An envious thrust from Tybalt hit the life
	Of stout Mercutio, and then Tybalt fled;
	But by and by comes back to Romeo,
	Who had but newly entertain'd revenge,
	And to 't they go like lightning, for, ere I
	Could draw to part them, was stout Tybalt slain.
	And, as he fell, did Romeo turn and fly.
	This is the truth, or let Benvolio die.

LADY CAPULET	He is a kinsman to the Montague;
	Affection makes him false; he speaks not true:
	Some twenty of them fought in this black strife,
	And all those twenty could but kill one life.
	I beg for justice, which thou, prince, must give;
	Romeo slew Tybalt, Romeo must not live.

PRINCE	Romeo slew him, he slew Mercutio;
	Who now the price of his dear blood doth owe?

MONTAGUE	Not Romeo, prince, he was Mercutio's friend;
	His fault concludes but what the law should end,
	The life of Tybalt.

PRINCE	And for that offence
	Immediately we do exile him hence:
	I have an interest in your hate's proceeding,
	My blood for your rude brawls doth lie a-bleeding;
	But I'll amerce you with so strong a fine
	That you shall all repent the loss of mine:
	I will be deaf to pleading and excuses;
	Nor tears nor prayers shall purchase out abuses:
	Therefore use none: let Romeo hence in haste,
	Else, when he's found, that hour is his last.
	Bear hence this body and attend our will:
	Mercy but murders, pardoning those that kill.

	[Exeunt]




	ROMEO AND JULIET


ACT III



SCENE II	Capulet's orchard.


	[Enter JULIET]

JULIET	Gallop apace, you fiery-footed steeds,
	Towards Phoebus' lodging: such a wagoner
	As Phaethon would whip you to the west,
	And bring in cloudy night immediately.
	Spread thy close curtain, love-performing night,
	That runaway's eyes may wink and Romeo
	Leap to these arms, untalk'd of and unseen.
	Lovers can see to do their amorous rites
	By their own beauties; or, if love be blind,
	It best agrees with night. Come, civil night,
	Thou sober-suited matron, all in black,
	And learn me how to lose a winning match,
	Play'd for a pair of stainless maidenhoods:
	Hood my unmann'd blood, bating in my cheeks,
	With thy black mantle; till strange love, grown bold,
	Think true love acted simple modesty.
	Come, night; come, Romeo; come, thou day in night;
	For thou wilt lie upon the wings of night
	Whiter than new snow on a raven's back.
	Come, gentle night, come, loving, black-brow'd night,
	Give me my Romeo; and, when he shall die,
	Take him and cut him out in little stars,
	And he will make the face of heaven so fine
	That all the world will be in love with night
	And pay no worship to the garish sun.
	O, I have bought the mansion of a love,
	But not possess'd it, and, though I am sold,
	Not yet enjoy'd: so tedious is this day
	As is the night before some festival
	To an impatient child that hath new robes
	And may not wear them. O, here comes my nurse,
	And she brings news; and every tongue that speaks
	But Romeo's name speaks heavenly eloquence.

	[Enter Nurse, with cords]

	Now, nurse, what news? What hast thou there? the cords
	That Romeo bid thee fetch?

Nurse	Ay, ay, the cords.

	[Throws them down]

JULIET	Ay me! what news? why dost thou wring thy hands?

Nurse	Ah, well-a-day! he's dead, he's dead, he's dead!
	We are undone, lady, we are undone!
	Alack the day! he's gone, he's kill'd, he's dead!

JULIET	Can heaven be so envious?

Nurse	Romeo can,
	Though heaven cannot: O Romeo, Romeo!
	Who ever would have thought it? Romeo!

JULIET	What devil art thou, that dost torment me thus?
	This torture should be roar'd in dismal hell.
	Hath Romeo slain himself? say thou but 'I,'
	And that bare vowel 'I' shall poison more
	Than the death-darting eye of cockatrice:
	I am not I, if there be such an I;
	Or those eyes shut, that make thee answer 'I.'
	If he be slain, say 'I'; or if not, no:
	Brief sounds determine of my weal or woe.

Nurse	I saw the wound, I saw it with mine eyes,--
	God save the mark!--here on his manly breast:
	A piteous corse, a bloody piteous corse;
	Pale, pale as ashes, all bedaub'd in blood,
	All in gore-blood; I swounded at the sight.

JULIET	O, break, my heart! poor bankrupt, break at once!
	To prison, eyes, ne'er look on liberty!
	Vile earth, to earth resign; end motion here;
	And thou and Romeo press one heavy bier!

Nurse	O Tybalt, Tybalt, the best friend I had!
	O courteous Tybalt! honest gentleman!
	That ever I should live to see thee dead!

JULIET	What storm is this that blows so contrary?
	Is Romeo slaughter'd, and is Tybalt dead?
	My dear-loved cousin, and my dearer lord?
	Then, dreadful trumpet, sound the general doom!
	For who is living, if those two are gone?

Nurse	Tybalt is gone, and Romeo banished;
	Romeo that kill'd him, he is banished.

JULIET	O God! did Romeo's hand shed Tybalt's blood?

Nurse	It did, it did; alas the day, it did!

JULIET	O serpent heart, hid with a flowering face!
	Did ever dragon keep so fair a cave?
	Beautiful tyrant! fiend angelical!
	Dove-feather'd raven! wolvish-ravening lamb!
	Despised substance of divinest show!
	Just opposite to what thou justly seem'st,
	A damned saint, an honourable villain!
	O nature, what hadst thou to do in hell,
	When thou didst bower the spirit of a fiend
	In moral paradise of such sweet flesh?
	Was ever book containing such vile matter
	So fairly bound? O that deceit should dwell
	In such a gorgeous palace!

Nurse	There's no trust,
	No faith, no honesty in men; all perjured,
	All forsworn, all naught, all dissemblers.
	Ah, where's my man? give me some aqua vitae:
	These griefs, these woes, these sorrows make me old.
	Shame come to Romeo!

JULIET	Blister'd be thy tongue
	For such a wish! he was not born to shame:
	Upon his brow shame is ashamed to sit;
	For 'tis a throne where honour may be crown'd
	Sole monarch of the universal earth.
	O, what a beast was I to chide at him!

Nurse	Will you speak well of him that kill'd your cousin?

JULIET	Shall I speak ill of him that is my husband?
	Ah, poor my lord, what tongue shall smooth thy name,
	When I, thy three-hours wife, have mangled it?
	But, wherefore, villain, didst thou kill my cousin?
	That villain cousin would have kill'd my husband:
	Back, foolish tears, back to your native spring;
	Your tributary drops belong to woe,
	Which you, mistaking, offer up to joy.
	My husband lives, that Tybalt would have slain;
	And Tybalt's dead, that would have slain my husband:
	All this is comfort; wherefore weep I then?
	Some word there was, worser than Tybalt's death,
	That murder'd me: I would forget it fain;
	But, O, it presses to my memory,
	Like damned guilty deeds to sinners' minds:
	'Tybalt is dead, and Romeo--banished;'
	That 'banished,' that one word 'banished,'
	Hath slain ten thousand Tybalts. Tybalt's death
	Was woe enough, if it had ended there:
	Or, if sour woe delights in fellowship
	And needly will be rank'd with other griefs,
	Why follow'd not, when she said 'Tybalt's dead,'
	Thy father, or thy mother, nay, or both,
	Which modern lamentations might have moved?
	But with a rear-ward following Tybalt's death,
	'Romeo is banished,' to speak that word,
	Is father, mother, Tybalt, Romeo, Juliet,
	All slain, all dead. 'Romeo is banished!'
	There is no end, no limit, measure, bound,
	In that word's death; no words can that woe sound.
	Where is my father, and my mother, nurse?

Nurse	Weeping and wailing over Tybalt's corse:
	Will you go to them? I will bring you thither.

JULIET	Wash they his wounds with tears: mine shall be spent,
	When theirs are dry, for Romeo's banishment.
	Take up those cords: poor ropes, you are beguiled,
	Both you and I; for Romeo is exiled:
	He made you for a highway to my bed;
	But I, a maid, die maiden-widowed.
	Come, cords, come, nurse; I'll to my wedding-bed;
	And death, not Romeo, take my maidenhead!

Nurse	Hie to your chamber: I'll find Romeo
	To comfort you: I wot well where he is.
	Hark ye, your Romeo will be here at night:
	I'll to him; he is hid at Laurence' cell.

JULIET	O, find him! give this ring to my true knight,
	And bid him come to take his last farewell.

	[Exeunt]




	ROMEO AND JULIET


ACT III



SCENE III	Friar Laurence's cell.


	[Enter FRIAR LAURENCE]

FRIAR LAURENCE	Romeo, come forth; come forth, thou fearful man:
	Affliction is enamour'd of thy parts,
	And thou art wedded to calamity.

	[Enter ROMEO]

ROMEO	Father, what news? what is the prince's doom?
	What sorrow craves acquaintance at my hand,
	That I yet know not?

FRIAR LAURENCE	Too familiar
	Is my dear son with such sour company:
	I bring thee tidings of the prince's doom.

ROMEO	What less than dooms-day is the prince's doom?

FRIAR LAURENCE	A gentler judgment vanish'd from his lips,
	Not body's death, but body's banishment.

ROMEO	Ha, banishment! be merciful, say 'death;'
	For exile hath more terror in his look,
	Much more than death: do not say 'banishment.'

FRIAR LAURENCE	Hence from Verona art thou banished:
	Be patient, for the world is broad and wide.

ROMEO	There is no world without Verona walls,
	But purgatory, torture, hell itself.
	Hence-banished is banish'd from the world,
	And world's exile is death: then banished,
	Is death mis-term'd: calling death banishment,
	Thou cutt'st my head off with a golden axe,
	And smilest upon the stroke that murders me.

FRIAR LAURENCE	O deadly sin! O rude unthankfulness!
	Thy fault our law calls death; but the kind prince,
	Taking thy part, hath rush'd aside the law,
	And turn'd that black word death to banishment:
	This is dear mercy, and thou seest it not.

ROMEO	'Tis torture, and not mercy: heaven is here,
	Where Juliet lives; and every cat and dog
	And little mouse, every unworthy thing,
	Live here in heaven and may look on her;
	But Romeo may not: more validity,
	More honourable state, more courtship lives
	In carrion-flies than Romeo: they my seize
	On the white wonder of dear Juliet's hand
	And steal immortal blessing from her lips,
	Who even in pure and vestal modesty,
	Still blush, as thinking their own kisses sin;
	But Romeo may not; he is banished:
	Flies may do this, but I from this must fly:
	They are free men, but I am banished.
	And say'st thou yet that exile is not death?
	Hadst thou no poison mix'd, no sharp-ground knife,
	No sudden mean of death, though ne'er so mean,
	But 'banished' to kill me?--'banished'?
	O friar, the damned use that word in hell;
	Howlings attend it: how hast thou the heart,
	Being a divine, a ghostly confessor,
	A sin-absolver, and my friend profess'd,
	To mangle me with that word 'banished'?

FRIAR LAURENCE	Thou fond mad man, hear me but speak a word.

ROMEO	O, thou wilt speak again of banishment.

FRIAR LAURENCE	I'll give thee armour to keep off that word:
	Adversity's sweet milk, philosophy,
	To comfort thee, though thou art banished.

ROMEO	Yet 'banished'? Hang up philosophy!
	Unless philosophy can make a Juliet,
	Displant a town, reverse a prince's doom,
	It helps not, it prevails not: talk no more.

FRIAR LAURENCE	O, then I see that madmen have no ears.

ROMEO	How should they, when that wise men have no eyes?

FRIAR LAURENCE	Let me dispute with thee of thy estate.

ROMEO	Thou canst not speak of that thou dost not feel:
	Wert thou as young as I, Juliet thy love,
	An hour but married, Tybalt murdered,
	Doting like me and like me banished,
	Then mightst thou speak, then mightst thou tear thy hair,
	And fall upon the ground, as I do now,
	Taking the measure of an unmade grave.

	[Knocking within]

FRIAR LAURENCE	Arise; one knocks; good Romeo, hide thyself.

ROMEO	Not I; unless the breath of heartsick groans,
	Mist-like, infold me from the search of eyes.

	[Knocking]

FRIAR LAURENCE	Hark, how they knock! Who's there? Romeo, arise;
	Thou wilt be taken. Stay awhile! Stand up;

	[Knocking]

	Run to my study. By and by! God's will,
	What simpleness is this! I come, I come!

	[Knocking]

	Who knocks so hard? whence come you? what's your will?

Nurse	[Within]  Let me come in, and you shall know
	my errand;
	I come from Lady Juliet.

FRIAR LAURENCE	Welcome, then.

	[Enter Nurse]

Nurse	O holy friar, O, tell me, holy friar,
	Where is my lady's lord, where's Romeo?

FRIAR LAURENCE	There on the ground, with his own tears made drunk.

Nurse	O, he is even in my mistress' case,
	Just in her case! O woful sympathy!
	Piteous predicament! Even so lies she,
	Blubbering and weeping, weeping and blubbering.
	Stand up, stand up; stand, and you be a man:
	For Juliet's sake, for her sake, rise and stand;
	Why should you fall into so deep an O?

ROMEO	Nurse!

Nurse	Ah sir! ah sir! Well, death's the end of all.

ROMEO	Spakest thou of Juliet? how is it with her?
	Doth she not think me an old murderer,
	Now I have stain'd the childhood of our joy
	With blood removed but little from her own?
	Where is she? and how doth she? and what says
	My conceal'd lady to our cancell'd love?

Nurse	O, she says nothing, sir, but weeps and weeps;
	And now falls on her bed; and then starts up,
	And Tybalt calls; and then on Romeo cries,
	And then down falls again.

ROMEO	As if that name,
	Shot from the deadly level of a gun,
	Did murder her; as that name's cursed hand
	Murder'd her kinsman. O, tell me, friar, tell me,
	In what vile part of this anatomy
	Doth my name lodge? tell me, that I may sack
	The hateful mansion.

	[Drawing his sword]

FRIAR LAURENCE	Hold thy desperate hand:
	Art thou a man? thy form cries out thou art:
	Thy tears are womanish; thy wild acts denote
	The unreasonable fury of a beast:
	Unseemly woman in a seeming man!
	Or ill-beseeming beast in seeming both!
	Thou hast amazed me: by my holy order,
	I thought thy disposition better temper'd.
	Hast thou slain Tybalt? wilt thou slay thyself?
	And stay thy lady too that lives in thee,
	By doing damned hate upon thyself?
	Why rail'st thou on thy birth, the heaven, and earth?
	Since birth, and heaven, and earth, all three do meet
	In thee at once; which thou at once wouldst lose.
	Fie, fie, thou shamest thy shape, thy love, thy wit;
	Which, like a usurer, abound'st in all,
	And usest none in that true use indeed
	Which should bedeck thy shape, thy love, thy wit:
	Thy noble shape is but a form of wax,
	Digressing from the valour of a man;
	Thy dear love sworn but hollow perjury,
	Killing that love which thou hast vow'd to cherish;
	Thy wit, that ornament to shape and love,
	Misshapen in the conduct of them both,
	Like powder in a skitless soldier's flask,
	Is set afire by thine own ignorance,
	And thou dismember'd with thine own defence.
	What, rouse thee, man! thy Juliet is alive,
	For whose dear sake thou wast but lately dead;
	There art thou happy: Tybalt would kill thee,
	But thou slew'st Tybalt; there are thou happy too:
	The law that threaten'd death becomes thy friend
	And turns it to exile; there art thou happy:
	A pack of blessings lights up upon thy back;
	Happiness courts thee in her best array;
	But, like a misbehaved and sullen wench,
	Thou pout'st upon thy fortune and thy love:
	Take heed, take heed, for such die miserable.
	Go, get thee to thy love, as was decreed,
	Ascend her chamber, hence and comfort her:
	But look thou stay not till the watch be set,
	For then thou canst not pass to Mantua;
	Where thou shalt live, till we can find a time
	To blaze your marriage, reconcile your friends,
	Beg pardon of the prince, and call thee back
	With twenty hundred thousand times more joy
	Than thou went'st forth in lamentation.
	Go before, nurse: commend me to thy lady;
	And bid her hasten all the house to bed,
	Which heavy sorrow makes them apt unto:
	Romeo is coming.

Nurse	O Lord, I could have stay'd here all the night
	To hear good counsel: O, what learning is!
	My lord, I'll tell my lady you will come.

ROMEO	Do so, and bid my sweet prepare to chide.

Nurse	Here, sir, a ring she bid me give you, sir:
	Hie you, make haste, for it grows very late.

	[Exit]

ROMEO	How well my comfort is revived by this!

FRIAR LAURENCE	Go hence; good night; and here stands all your state:
	Either be gone before the watch be set,
	Or by the break of day disguised from hence:
	Sojourn in Mantua; I'll find out your man,
	And he shall signify from time to time
	Every good hap to you that chances here:
	Give me thy hand; 'tis late: farewell; good night.

ROMEO	But that a joy past joy calls out on me,
	It were a grief, so brief to part with thee: Farewell.

	[Exeunt]




	ROMEO AND JULIET


ACT III



SCENE IV	A room in Capulet's house.


	[Enter CAPULET, LADY CAPULET, and PARIS]

CAPULET	Things have fall'n out, sir, so unluckily,
	That we have had no time to move our daughter:
	Look you, she loved her kinsman Tybalt dearly,
	And so did I:--Well, we were born to die.
	'Tis very late, she'll not come down to-night:
	I promise you, but for your company,
	I would have been a-bed an hour ago.

PARIS	These times of woe afford no time to woo.
	Madam, good night: commend me to your daughter.

LADY CAPULET	I will, and know her mind early to-morrow;
	To-night she is mew'd up to her heaviness.

CAPULET	Sir Paris, I will make a desperate tender
	Of my child's love: I think she will be ruled
	In all respects by me; nay, more, I doubt it not.
	Wife, go you to her ere you go to bed;
	Acquaint her here of my son Paris' love;
	And bid her, mark you me, on Wednesday next--
	But, soft! what day is this?

PARIS	Monday, my lord,

CAPULET	Monday! ha, ha! Well, Wednesday is too soon,
	O' Thursday let it be: o' Thursday, tell her,
	She shall be married to this noble earl.
	Will you be ready? do you like this haste?
	We'll keep no great ado,--a friend or two;
	For, hark you, Tybalt being slain so late,
	It may be thought we held him carelessly,
	Being our kinsman, if we revel much:
	Therefore we'll have some half a dozen friends,
	And there an end. But what say you to Thursday?

PARIS	My lord, I would that Thursday were to-morrow.

CAPULET	Well get you gone: o' Thursday be it, then.
	Go you to Juliet ere you go to bed,
	Prepare her, wife, against this wedding-day.
	Farewell, my lord. Light to my chamber, ho!
	Afore me! it is so very very late,
	That we may call it early by and by.
	Good night.

	[Exeunt]




	ROMEO AND JULIET


ACT III



SCENE V	Capulet's orchard.


	[Enter ROMEO and JULIET above, at the window]

JULIET	Wilt thou be gone? it is not yet near day:
	It was the nightingale, and not the lark,
	That pierced the fearful hollow of thine ear;
	Nightly she sings on yon pomegranate-tree:
	Believe me, love, it was the nightingale.

ROMEO	It was the lark, the herald of the morn,
	No nightingale: look, love, what envious streaks
	Do lace the severing clouds in yonder east:
	Night's candles are burnt out, and jocund day
	Stands tiptoe on the misty mountain tops.
	I must be gone and live, or stay and die.

JULIET	Yon light is not day-light, I know it, I:
	It is some meteor that the sun exhales,
	To be to thee this night a torch-bearer,
	And light thee on thy way to Mantua:
	Therefore stay yet; thou need'st not to be gone.

ROMEO	Let me be ta'en, let me be put to death;
	I am content, so thou wilt have it so.
	I'll say yon grey is not the morning's eye,
	'Tis but the pale reflex of Cynthia's brow;
	Nor that is not the lark, whose notes do beat
	The vaulty heaven so high above our heads:
	I have more care to stay than will to go:
	Come, death, and welcome! Juliet wills it so.
	How is't, my soul? let's talk; it is not day.

JULIET	It is, it is: hie hence, be gone, away!
	It is the lark that sings so out of tune,
	Straining harsh discords and unpleasing sharps.
	Some say the lark makes sweet division;
	This doth not so, for she divideth us:
	Some say the lark and loathed toad change eyes,
	O, now I would they had changed voices too!
	Since arm from arm that voice doth us affray,
	Hunting thee hence with hunt's-up to the day,
	O, now be gone; more light and light it grows.

ROMEO	More light and light; more dark and dark our woes!

	[Enter Nurse, to the chamber]

Nurse	Madam!

JULIET	Nurse?

Nurse	Your lady mother is coming to your chamber:
	The day is broke; be wary, look about.

	[Exit]

JULIET	Then, window, let day in, and let life out.

ROMEO	Farewell, farewell! one kiss, and I'll descend.

	[He goeth down]

JULIET	Art thou gone so? love, lord, ay, husband, friend!
	I must hear from thee every day in the hour,
	For in a minute there are many days:
	O, by this count I shall be much in years
	Ere I again behold my Romeo!

ROMEO	Farewell!
	I will omit no opportunity
	That may convey my greetings, love, to thee.

JULIET	O think'st thou we shall ever meet again?

ROMEO	I doubt it not; and all these woes shall serve
	For sweet discourses in our time to come.

JULIET	O God, I have an ill-divining soul!
	Methinks I see thee, now thou art below,
	As one dead in the bottom of a tomb:
	Either my eyesight fails, or thou look'st pale.

ROMEO	And trust me, love, in my eye so do you:
	Dry sorrow drinks our blood. Adieu, adieu!

	[Exit]

JULIET	O fortune, fortune! all men call thee fickle:
	If thou art fickle, what dost thou with him.
	That is renown'd for faith? Be fickle, fortune;
	For then, I hope, thou wilt not keep him long,
	But send him back.

LADY CAPULET	[Within]         Ho, daughter! are you up?

JULIET	Who is't that calls? is it my lady mother?
	Is she not down so late, or up so early?
	What unaccustom'd cause procures her hither?

	[Enter LADY CAPULET]

LADY CAPULET	Why, how now, Juliet!

JULIET	Madam, I am not well.

LADY CAPULET	Evermore weeping for your cousin's death?
	What, wilt thou wash him from his grave with tears?
	An if thou couldst, thou couldst not make him live;
	Therefore, have done: some grief shows much of love;
	But much of grief shows still some want of wit.

JULIET	Yet let me weep for such a feeling loss.

LADY CAPULET	So shall you feel the loss, but not the friend
	Which you weep for.

JULIET	Feeling so the loss,
	Cannot choose but ever weep the friend.

LADY CAPULET	Well, girl, thou weep'st not so much for his death,
	As that the villain lives which slaughter'd him.

JULIET	What villain madam?

LADY CAPULET	That same villain, Romeo.

JULIET	[Aside]  Villain and he be many miles asunder.--
	God Pardon him! I do, with all my heart;
	And yet no man like he doth grieve my heart.

LADY CAPULET	That is, because the traitor murderer lives.

JULIET	Ay, madam, from the reach of these my hands:
	Would none but I might venge my cousin's death!

LADY CAPULET	We will have vengeance for it, fear thou not:
	Then weep no more. I'll send to one in Mantua,
	Where that same banish'd runagate doth live,
	Shall give him such an unaccustom'd dram,
	That he shall soon keep Tybalt company:
	And then, I hope, thou wilt be satisfied.

JULIET	Indeed, I never shall be satisfied
	With Romeo, till I behold him--dead--
	Is my poor heart for a kinsman vex'd.
	Madam, if you could find out but a man
	To bear a poison, I would temper it;
	That Romeo should, upon receipt thereof,
	Soon sleep in quiet. O, how my heart abhors
	To hear him named, and cannot come to him.
	To wreak the love I bore my cousin
	Upon his body that slaughter'd him!

LADY CAPULET	Find thou the means, and I'll find such a man.
	But now I'll tell thee joyful tidings, girl.

JULIET	And joy comes well in such a needy time:
	What are they, I beseech your ladyship?

LADY CAPULET	Well, well, thou hast a careful father, child;
	One who, to put thee from thy heaviness,
	Hath sorted out a sudden day of joy,
	That thou expect'st not nor I look'd not for.

JULIET	Madam, in happy time, what day is that?

LADY CAPULET	Marry, my child, early next Thursday morn,
	The gallant, young and noble gentleman,
	The County Paris, at Saint Peter's Church,
	Shall happily make thee there a joyful bride.

JULIET	Now, by Saint Peter's Church and Peter too,
	He shall not make me there a joyful bride.
	I wonder at this haste; that I must wed
	Ere he, that should be husband, comes to woo.
	I pray you, tell my lord and father, madam,
	I will not marry yet; and, when I do, I swear,
	It shall be Romeo, whom you know I hate,
	Rather than Paris. These are news indeed!

LADY CAPULET	Here comes your father; tell him so yourself,
	And see how he will take it at your hands.

	[Enter CAPULET and Nurse]

CAPULET	When the sun sets, the air doth drizzle dew;
	But for the sunset of my brother's son
	It rains downright.
	How now! a conduit, girl? what, still in tears?
	Evermore showering? In one little body
	Thou counterfeit'st a bark, a sea, a wind;
	For still thy eyes, which I may call the sea,
	Do ebb and flow with tears; the bark thy body is,
	Sailing in this salt flood; the winds, thy sighs;
	Who, raging with thy tears, and they with them,
	Without a sudden calm, will overset
	Thy tempest-tossed body. How now, wife!
	Have you deliver'd to her our decree?

LADY CAPULET	Ay, sir; but she will none, she gives you thanks.
	I would the fool were married to her grave!

CAPULET	Soft! take me with you, take me with you, wife.
	How! will she none? doth she not give us thanks?
	Is she not proud? doth she not count her blest,
	Unworthy as she is, that we have wrought
	So worthy a gentleman to be her bridegroom?

JULIET	Not proud, you have; but thankful, that you have:
	Proud can I never be of what I hate;
	But thankful even for hate, that is meant love.

CAPULET	How now, how now, chop-logic! What is this?
	'Proud,' and 'I thank you,' and 'I thank you not;'
	And yet 'not proud,' mistress minion, you,
	Thank me no thankings, nor, proud me no prouds,
	But fettle your fine joints 'gainst Thursday next,
	To go with Paris to Saint Peter's Church,
	Or I will drag thee on a hurdle thither.
	Out, you green-sickness carrion! out, you baggage!
	You tallow-face!

LADY CAPULET	                  Fie, fie! what, are you mad?

JULIET	Good father, I beseech you on my knees,
	Hear me with patience but to speak a word.

CAPULET	Hang thee, young baggage! disobedient wretch!
	I tell thee what: get thee to church o' Thursday,
	Or never after look me in the face:
	Speak not, reply not, do not answer me;
	My fingers itch. Wife, we scarce thought us blest
	That God had lent us but this only child;
	But now I see this one is one too much,
	And that we have a curse in having her:
	Out on her, hilding!

Nurse	God in heaven bless her!
	You are to blame, my lord, to rate her so.

CAPULET	And why, my lady wisdom? hold your tongue,
	Good prudence; smatter with your gossips, go.

Nurse	I speak no treason.

CAPULET	O, God ye god-den.

Nurse	May not one speak?

CAPULET	                  Peace, you mumbling fool!
	Utter your gravity o'er a gossip's bowl;
	For here we need it not.

LADY CAPULET	You are too hot.

CAPULET	God's bread! it makes me mad:
	Day, night, hour, tide, time, work, play,
	Alone, in company, still my care hath been
	To have her match'd: and having now provided
	A gentleman of noble parentage,
	Of fair demesnes, youthful, and nobly train'd,
	Stuff'd, as they say, with honourable parts,
	Proportion'd as one's thought would wish a man;
	And then to have a wretched puling fool,
	A whining mammet, in her fortune's tender,
	To answer 'I'll not wed; I cannot love,
	I am too young; I pray you, pardon me.'
	But, as you will not wed, I'll pardon you:
	Graze where you will you shall not house with me:
	Look to't, think on't, I do not use to jest.
	Thursday is near; lay hand on heart, advise:
	An you be mine, I'll give you to my friend;
	And you be not, hang, beg, starve, die in
	the streets,
	For, by my soul, I'll ne'er acknowledge thee,
	Nor what is mine shall never do thee good:
	Trust to't, bethink you; I'll not be forsworn.

	[Exit]

JULIET	Is there no pity sitting in the clouds,
	That sees into the bottom of my grief?
	O, sweet my mother, cast me not away!
	Delay this marriage for a month, a week;
	Or, if you do not, make the bridal bed
	In that dim monument where Tybalt lies.

LADY CAPULET	Talk not to me, for I'll not speak a word:
	Do as thou wilt, for I have done with thee.

	[Exit]

JULIET	O God!--O nurse, how shall this be prevented?
	My husband is on earth, my faith in heaven;
	How shall that faith return again to earth,
	Unless that husband send it me from heaven
	By leaving earth? comfort me, counsel me.
	Alack, alack, that heaven should practise stratagems
	Upon so soft a subject as myself!
	What say'st thou? hast thou not a word of joy?
	Some comfort, nurse.

Nurse	Faith, here it is.
	Romeo is banish'd; and all the world to nothing,
	That he dares ne'er come back to challenge you;
	Or, if he do, it needs must be by stealth.
	Then, since the case so stands as now it doth,
	I think it best you married with the county.
	O, he's a lovely gentleman!
	Romeo's a dishclout to him: an eagle, madam,
	Hath not so green, so quick, so fair an eye
	As Paris hath. Beshrew my very heart,
	I think you are happy in this second match,
	For it excels your first: or if it did not,
	Your first is dead; or 'twere as good he were,
	As living here and you no use of him.

JULIET	Speakest thou from thy heart?

Nurse	And from my soul too;
	Or else beshrew them both.

JULIET	Amen!

Nurse	What?

JULIET	Well, thou hast comforted me marvellous much.
	Go in: and tell my lady I am gone,
	Having displeased my father, to Laurence' cell,
	To make confession and to be absolved.

Nurse	Marry, I will; and this is wisely done.

	[Exit]

JULIET	Ancient damnation! O most wicked fiend!
	Is it more sin to wish me thus forsworn,
	Or to dispraise my lord with that same tongue
	Which she hath praised him with above compare
	So many thousand times? Go, counsellor;
	Thou and my bosom henceforth shall be twain.
	I'll to the friar, to know his remedy:
	If all else fail, myself have power to die.

	[Exit]




	ROMEO AND JULIET


ACT IV



SCENE I	Friar Laurence's cell.


	[Enter FRIAR LAURENCE and PARIS]

FRIAR LAURENCE	On Thursday, sir? the time is very short.

PARIS	My father Capulet will have it so;
	And I am nothing slow to slack his haste.

FRIAR LAURENCE	You say you do not know the lady's mind:
	Uneven is the course, I like it not.

PARIS	Immoderately she weeps for Tybalt's death,
	And therefore have I little talk'd of love;
	For Venus smiles not in a house of tears.
	Now, sir, her father counts it dangerous
	That she doth give her sorrow so much sway,
	And in his wisdom hastes our marriage,
	To stop the inundation of her tears;
	Which, too much minded by herself alone,
	May be put from her by society:
	Now do you know the reason of this haste.

FRIAR LAURENCE	[Aside]  I would I knew not why it should be slow'd.
	Look, sir, here comes the lady towards my cell.

	[Enter JULIET]

PARIS	Happily met, my lady and my wife!

JULIET	That may be, sir, when I may be a wife.

PARIS	That may be must be, love, on Thursday next.

JULIET	What must be shall be.

FRIAR LAURENCE	That's a certain text.

PARIS	Come you to make confession to this father?

JULIET	To answer that, I should confess to you.

PARIS	Do not deny to him that you love me.

JULIET	I will confess to you that I love him.

PARIS	So will ye, I am sure, that you love me.

JULIET	If I do so, it will be of more price,
	Being spoke behind your back, than to your face.

PARIS	Poor soul, thy face is much abused with tears.

JULIET	The tears have got small victory by that;
	For it was bad enough before their spite.

PARIS	Thou wrong'st it, more than tears, with that report.

JULIET	That is no slander, sir, which is a truth;
	And what I spake, I spake it to my face.

PARIS	Thy face is mine, and thou hast slander'd it.

JULIET	It may be so, for it is not mine own.
	Are you at leisure, holy father, now;
	Or shall I come to you at evening mass?

FRIAR LAURENCE	My leisure serves me, pensive daughter, now.
	My lord, we must entreat the time alone.

PARIS	God shield I should disturb devotion!
	Juliet, on Thursday early will I rouse ye:
	Till then, adieu; and keep this holy kiss.

	[Exit]

JULIET	O shut the door! and when thou hast done so,
	Come weep with me; past hope, past cure, past help!

FRIAR LAURENCE	Ah, Juliet, I already know thy grief;
	It strains me past the compass of my wits:
	I hear thou must, and nothing may prorogue it,
	On Thursday next be married to this county.

JULIET	Tell me not, friar, that thou hear'st of this,
	Unless thou tell me how I may prevent it:
	If, in thy wisdom, thou canst give no help,
	Do thou but call my resolution wise,
	And with this knife I'll help it presently.
	God join'd my heart and Romeo's, thou our hands;
	And ere this hand, by thee to Romeo seal'd,
	Shall be the label to another deed,
	Or my true heart with treacherous revolt
	Turn to another, this shall slay them both:
	Therefore, out of thy long-experienced time,
	Give me some present counsel, or, behold,
	'Twixt my extremes and me this bloody knife
	Shall play the umpire, arbitrating that
	Which the commission of thy years and art
	Could to no issue of true honour bring.
	Be not so long to speak; I long to die,
	If what thou speak'st speak not of remedy.

FRIAR LAURENCE	Hold, daughter: I do spy a kind of hope,
	Which craves as desperate an execution.
	As that is desperate which we would prevent.
	If, rather than to marry County Paris,
	Thou hast the strength of will to slay thyself,
	Then is it likely thou wilt undertake
	A thing like death to chide away this shame,
	That copest with death himself to scape from it:
	And, if thou darest, I'll give thee remedy.

JULIET	O, bid me leap, rather than marry Paris,
	From off the battlements of yonder tower;
	Or walk in thievish ways; or bid me lurk
	Where serpents are; chain me with roaring bears;
	Or shut me nightly in a charnel-house,
	O'er-cover'd quite with dead men's rattling bones,
	With reeky shanks and yellow chapless skulls;
	Or bid me go into a new-made grave
	And hide me with a dead man in his shroud;
	Things that, to hear them told, have made me tremble;
	And I will do it without fear or doubt,
	To live an unstain'd wife to my sweet love.

FRIAR LAURENCE	Hold, then; go home, be merry, give consent
	To marry Paris: Wednesday is to-morrow:
	To-morrow night look that thou lie alone;
	Let not thy nurse lie with thee in thy chamber:
	Take thou this vial, being then in bed,
	And this distilled liquor drink thou off;
	When presently through all thy veins shall run
	A cold and drowsy humour, for no pulse
	Shall keep his native progress, but surcease:
	No warmth, no breath, shall testify thou livest;
	The roses in thy lips and cheeks shall fade
	To paly ashes, thy eyes' windows fall,
	Like death, when he shuts up the day of life;
	Each part, deprived of supple government,
	Shall, stiff and stark and cold, appear like death:
	And in this borrow'd likeness of shrunk death
	Thou shalt continue two and forty hours,
	And then awake as from a pleasant sleep.
	Now, when the bridegroom in the morning comes
	To rouse thee from thy bed, there art thou dead:
	Then, as the manner of our country is,
	In thy best robes uncover'd on the bier
	Thou shalt be borne to that same ancient vault
	Where all the kindred of the Capulets lie.
	In the mean time, against thou shalt awake,
	Shall Romeo by my letters know our drift,
	And hither shall he come: and he and I
	Will watch thy waking, and that very night
	Shall Romeo bear thee hence to Mantua.
	And this shall free thee from this present shame;
	If no inconstant toy, nor womanish fear,
	Abate thy valour in the acting it.

JULIET	Give me, give me! O, tell not me of fear!

FRIAR LAURENCE	Hold; get you gone, be strong and prosperous
	In this resolve: I'll send a friar with speed
	To Mantua, with my letters to thy lord.

JULIET	Love give me strength! and strength shall help afford.
	Farewell, dear father!

	[Exeunt]




	ROMEO AND JULIET


ACT IV



SCENE II	Hall in Capulet's house.


	[Enter CAPULET, LADY  CAPULET, Nurse, and two
	Servingmen]

CAPULET	So many guests invite as here are writ.

	[Exit First Servant]

	Sirrah, go hire me twenty cunning cooks.

Second Servant	You shall have none ill, sir; for I'll try if they
	can lick their fingers.

CAPULET	How canst thou try them so?

Second Servant	Marry, sir, 'tis an ill cook that cannot lick his
	own fingers: therefore he that cannot lick his
	fingers goes not with me.

CAPULET	Go, be gone.

	[Exit Second Servant]

	We shall be much unfurnished for this time.
	What, is my daughter gone to Friar Laurence?

Nurse	Ay, forsooth.

CAPULET	Well, he may chance to do some good on her:
	A peevish self-will'd harlotry it is.

Nurse	See where she comes from shrift with merry look.

	[Enter JULIET]

CAPULET	How now, my headstrong! where have you been gadding?

JULIET	Where I have learn'd me to repent the sin
	Of disobedient opposition
	To you and your behests, and am enjoin'd
	By holy Laurence to fall prostrate here,
	And beg your pardon: pardon, I beseech you!
	Henceforward I am ever ruled by you.

CAPULET	Send for the county; go tell him of this:
	I'll have this knot knit up to-morrow morning.

JULIET	I met the youthful lord at Laurence' cell;
	And gave him what becomed love I might,
	Not step o'er the bounds of modesty.

CAPULET	Why, I am glad on't; this is well: stand up:
	This is as't should be. Let me see the county;
	Ay, marry, go, I say, and fetch him hither.
	Now, afore God! this reverend holy friar,
	Our whole city is much bound to him.

JULIET	Nurse, will you go with me into my closet,
	To help me sort such needful ornaments
	As you think fit to furnish me to-morrow?

LADY CAPULET	No, not till Thursday; there is time enough.

CAPULET	Go, nurse, go with her: we'll to church to-morrow.

	[Exeunt JULIET and Nurse]

LADY  CAPULET	We shall be short in our provision:
	'Tis now near night.

CAPULET	Tush, I will stir about,
	And all things shall be well, I warrant thee, wife:
	Go thou to Juliet, help to deck up her;
	I'll not to bed to-night; let me alone;
	I'll play the housewife for this once. What, ho!
	They are all forth. Well, I will walk myself
	To County Paris, to prepare him up
	Against to-morrow: my heart is wondrous light,
	Since this same wayward girl is so reclaim'd.

	[Exeunt]




	ROMEO AND JULIET


ACT IV



SCENE III	Juliet's chamber.


	[Enter JULIET and Nurse]

JULIET	Ay, those attires are best: but, gentle nurse,
	I pray thee, leave me to myself to-night,
	For I have need of many orisons
	To move the heavens to smile upon my state,
	Which, well thou know'st, is cross, and full of sin.

	[Enter LADY CAPULET]

LADY CAPULET	What, are you busy, ho? need you my help?

JULIET	No, madam; we have cull'd such necessaries
	As are behoveful for our state to-morrow:
	So please you, let me now be left alone,
	And let the nurse this night sit up with you;
	For, I am sure, you have your hands full all,
	In this so sudden business.

LADY CAPULET	Good night:
	Get thee to bed, and rest; for thou hast need.

	[Exeunt LADY CAPULET and Nurse]

JULIET	Farewell! God knows when we shall meet again.
	I have a faint cold fear thrills through my veins,
	That almost freezes up the heat of life:
	I'll call them back again to comfort me:
	Nurse! What should she do here?
	My dismal scene I needs must act alone.
	Come, vial.
	What if this mixture do not work at all?
	Shall I be married then to-morrow morning?
	No, no: this shall forbid it: lie thou there.

	[Laying down her dagger]

	What if it be a poison, which the friar
	Subtly hath minister'd to have me dead,
	Lest in this marriage he should be dishonour'd,
	Because he married me before to Romeo?
	I fear it is: and yet, methinks, it should not,
	For he hath still been tried a holy man.
	How if, when I am laid into the tomb,
	I wake before the time that Romeo
	Come to redeem me? there's a fearful point!
	Shall I not, then, be stifled in the vault,
	To whose foul mouth no healthsome air breathes in,
	And there die strangled ere my Romeo comes?
	Or, if I live, is it not very like,
	The horrible conceit of death and night,
	Together with the terror of the place,--
	As in a vault, an ancient receptacle,
	Where, for these many hundred years, the bones
	Of all my buried ancestors are packed:
	Where bloody Tybalt, yet but green in earth,
	Lies festering in his shroud; where, as they say,
	At some hours in the night spirits resort;--
	Alack, alack, is it not like that I,
	So early waking, what with loathsome smells,
	And shrieks like mandrakes' torn out of the earth,
	That living mortals, hearing them, run mad:--
	O, if I wake, shall I not be distraught,
	Environed with all these hideous fears?
	And madly play with my forefather's joints?
	And pluck the mangled Tybalt from his shroud?
	And, in this rage, with some great kinsman's bone,
	As with a club, dash out my desperate brains?
	O, look! methinks I see my cousin's ghost
	Seeking out Romeo, that did spit his body
	Upon a rapier's point: stay, Tybalt, stay!
	Romeo, I come! this do I drink to thee.

	[She falls upon her bed, within the curtains]




	ROMEO AND JULIET


ACT IV



SCENE IV	Hall in Capulet's house.


	[Enter LADY CAPULET and Nurse]

LADY CAPULET	Hold, take these keys, and fetch more spices, nurse.

Nurse	They call for dates and quinces in the pastry.

	[Enter CAPULET]

CAPULET	Come, stir, stir, stir! the second cock hath crow'd,
	The curfew-bell hath rung, 'tis three o'clock:
	Look to the baked meats, good Angelica:
	Spare not for the cost.

Nurse	Go, you cot-quean, go,
	Get you to bed; faith, You'll be sick to-morrow
	For this night's watching.

CAPULET	No, not a whit: what! I have watch'd ere now
	All night for lesser cause, and ne'er been sick.

LADY CAPULET	Ay, you have been a mouse-hunt in your time;
	But I will watch you from such watching now.

	[Exeunt LADY CAPULET and Nurse]

CAPULET	A jealous hood, a jealous hood!

	[Enter three or four Servingmen, with spits, logs,
	and baskets]

		          Now, fellow,
	What's there?

First Servant	Things for the cook, sir; but I know not what.

CAPULET	Make haste, make haste.

	[Exit First Servant]

		  Sirrah, fetch drier logs:
	Call Peter, he will show thee where they are.

Second Servant	I have a head, sir, that will find out logs,
	And never trouble Peter for the matter.

	[Exit]

CAPULET	Mass, and well said; a merry whoreson, ha!
	Thou shalt be logger-head. Good faith, 'tis day:
	The county will be here with music straight,
	For so he said he would: I hear him near.

	[Music within]

	Nurse! Wife! What, ho! What, nurse, I say!

	[Re-enter Nurse]

	Go waken Juliet, go and trim her up;
	I'll go and chat with Paris: hie, make haste,
	Make haste; the bridegroom he is come already:
	Make haste, I say.

	[Exeunt]




	ROMEO AND JULIET


ACT IV



SCENE V	Juliet's chamber.


	[Enter Nurse]

Nurse	Mistress! what, mistress! Juliet! fast, I warrant her, she:
	Why, lamb! why, lady! fie, you slug-a-bed!
	Why, love, I say! madam! sweet-heart! why, bride!
	What, not a word? you take your pennyworths now;
	Sleep for a week; for the next night, I warrant,
	The County Paris hath set up his rest,
	That you shall rest but little. God forgive me,
	Marry, and amen, how sound is she asleep!
	I must needs wake her. Madam, madam, madam!
	Ay, let the county take you in your bed;
	He'll fright you up, i' faith. Will it not be?

	[Undraws the curtains]

	What, dress'd! and in your clothes! and down again!
	I must needs wake you; Lady! lady! lady!
	Alas, alas! Help, help! my lady's dead!
	O, well-a-day, that ever I was born!
	Some aqua vitae, ho! My lord! my lady!

	[Enter LADY CAPULET]

LADY CAPULET	What noise is here?

Nurse	O lamentable day!

LADY CAPULET	What is the matter?

Nurse	Look, look! O heavy day!

LADY CAPULET	O me, O me! My child, my only life,
	Revive, look up, or I will die with thee!
	Help, help! Call help.

	[Enter CAPULET]

CAPULET	For shame, bring Juliet forth; her lord is come.

Nurse	She's dead, deceased, she's dead; alack the day!

LADY CAPULET	Alack the day, she's dead, she's dead, she's dead!

CAPULET	Ha! let me see her: out, alas! she's cold:
	Her blood is settled, and her joints are stiff;
	Life and these lips have long been separated:
	Death lies on her like an untimely frost
	Upon the sweetest flower of all the field.

Nurse	O lamentable day!

LADY CAPULET	                  O woful time!

CAPULET	Death, that hath ta'en her hence to make me wail,
	Ties up my tongue, and will not let me speak.

	[Enter FRIAR LAURENCE and PARIS, with Musicians]

FRIAR LAURENCE	Come, is the bride ready to go to church?

CAPULET	Ready to go, but never to return.
	O son! the night before thy wedding-day
	Hath Death lain with thy wife. There she lies,
	Flower as she was, deflowered by him.
	Death is my son-in-law, Death is my heir;
	My daughter he hath wedded: I will die,
	And leave him all; life, living, all is Death's.

PARIS	Have I thought long to see this morning's face,
	And doth it give me such a sight as this?

LADY CAPULET	Accursed, unhappy, wretched, hateful day!
	Most miserable hour that e'er time saw
	In lasting labour of his pilgrimage!
	But one, poor one, one poor and loving child,
	But one thing to rejoice and solace in,
	And cruel death hath catch'd it from my sight!

Nurse	O woe! O woful, woful, woful day!
	Most lamentable day, most woful day,
	That ever, ever, I did yet behold!
	O day! O day! O day! O hateful day!
	Never was seen so black a day as this:
	O woful day, O woful day!

PARIS	Beguiled, divorced, wronged, spited, slain!
	Most detestable death, by thee beguil'd,
	By cruel cruel thee quite overthrown!
	O love! O life! not life, but love in death!

CAPULET	Despised, distressed, hated, martyr'd, kill'd!
	Uncomfortable time, why camest thou now
	To murder, murder our solemnity?
	O child! O child! my soul, and not my child!
	Dead art thou! Alack! my child is dead;
	And with my child my joys are buried.

FRIAR LAURENCE	Peace, ho, for shame! confusion's cure lives not
	In these confusions. Heaven and yourself
	Had part in this fair maid; now heaven hath all,
	And all the better is it for the maid:
	Your part in her you could not keep from death,
	But heaven keeps his part in eternal life.
	The most you sought was her promotion;
	For 'twas your heaven she should be advanced:
	And weep ye now, seeing she is advanced
	Above the clouds, as high as heaven itself?
	O, in this love, you love your child so ill,
	That you run mad, seeing that she is well:
	She's not well married that lives married long;
	But she's best married that dies married young.
	Dry up your tears, and stick your rosemary
	On this fair corse; and, as the custom is,
	In all her best array bear her to church:
	For though fond nature bids us an lament,
	Yet nature's tears are reason's merriment.

CAPULET	All things that we ordained festival,
	Turn from their office to black funeral;
	Our instruments to melancholy bells,
	Our wedding cheer to a sad burial feast,
	Our solemn hymns to sullen dirges change,
	Our bridal flowers serve for a buried corse,
	And all things change them to the contrary.

FRIAR LAURENCE	Sir, go you in; and, madam, go with him;
	And go, Sir Paris; every one prepare
	To follow this fair corse unto her grave:
	The heavens do lour upon you for some ill;
	Move them no more by crossing their high will.

	[Exeunt CAPULET, LADY CAPULET, PARIS, and FRIAR LAURENCE]

First Musician	Faith, we may put up our pipes, and be gone.

Nurse	Honest goodfellows, ah, put up, put up;
	For, well you know, this is a pitiful case.

	[Exit]

First Musician	Ay, by my troth, the case may be amended.

	[Enter PETER]

PETER	Musicians, O, musicians, 'Heart's ease, Heart's
	ease:' O, an you will have me live, play 'Heart's ease.'

First Musician	Why 'Heart's ease?'

PETER	O, musicians, because my heart itself plays 'My
	heart is full of woe:' O, play me some merry dump,
	to comfort me.

First Musician	Not a dump we; 'tis no time to play now.

PETER	You will not, then?

First Musician	No.

PETER	I will then give it you soundly.

First Musician	What will you give us?

PETER	No money, on my faith, but the gleek;
	I will give you the minstrel.

First Musician	Then I will give you the serving-creature.

PETER	Then will I lay the serving-creature's dagger on
	your pate. I will carry no crotchets: I'll re you,
	I'll fa you; do you note me?

First Musician	An you re us and fa us, you note us.

Second Musician	Pray you, put up your dagger, and put out your wit.

PETER	Then have at you with my wit! I will dry-beat you
	with an iron wit, and put up my iron dagger. Answer
	me like men:
	'When griping grief the heart doth wound,
	And doleful dumps the mind oppress,
	Then music with her silver sound'--
	why 'silver sound'? why 'music with her silver
	sound'? What say you, Simon Catling?

Musician	Marry, sir, because silver hath a sweet sound.

PETER	Pretty! What say you, Hugh Rebeck?

Second Musician	I say 'silver sound,' because musicians sound for silver.

PETER	Pretty too! What say you, James Soundpost?

Third Musician	Faith, I know not what to say.

PETER	O, I cry you mercy; you are the singer: I will say
	for you. It is 'music with her silver sound,'
	because musicians have no gold for sounding:
	'Then music with her silver sound
	With speedy help doth lend redress.'

	[Exit]

First Musician	What a pestilent knave is this same!

Second Musician	Hang him, Jack! Come, we'll in here; tarry for the
	mourners, and stay dinner.

	[Exeunt]




	ROMEO AND JULIET


ACT V



SCENE I	Mantua. A street.


	[Enter ROMEO]

ROMEO	If I may trust the flattering truth of sleep,
	My dreams presage some joyful news at hand:
	My bosom's lord sits lightly in his throne;
	And all this day an unaccustom'd spirit
	Lifts me above the ground with cheerful thoughts.
	I dreamt my lady came and found me dead--
	Strange dream, that gives a dead man leave
	to think!--
	And breathed such life with kisses in my lips,
	That I revived, and was an emperor.
	Ah me! how sweet is love itself possess'd,
	When but love's shadows are so rich in joy!

	[Enter BALTHASAR, booted]

	News from Verona!--How now, Balthasar!
	Dost thou not bring me letters from the friar?
	How doth my lady? Is my father well?
	How fares my Juliet? that I ask again;
	For nothing can be ill, if she be well.

BALTHASAR	Then she is well, and nothing can be ill:
	Her body sleeps in Capel's monument,
	And her immortal part with angels lives.
	I saw her laid low in her kindred's vault,
	And presently took post to tell it you:
	O, pardon me for bringing these ill news,
	Since you did leave it for my office, sir.

ROMEO	Is it even so? then I defy you, stars!
	Thou know'st my lodging: get me ink and paper,
	And hire post-horses; I will hence to-night.

BALTHASAR	I do beseech you, sir, have patience:
	Your looks are pale and wild, and do import
	Some misadventure.

ROMEO	                  Tush, thou art deceived:
	Leave me, and do the thing I bid thee do.
	Hast thou no letters to me from the friar?

BALTHASAR	No, my good lord.

ROMEO	                  No matter: get thee gone,
	And hire those horses; I'll be with thee straight.

	[Exit BALTHASAR]

	Well, Juliet, I will lie with thee to-night.
	Let's see for means: O mischief, thou art swift
	To enter in the thoughts of desperate men!
	I do remember an apothecary,--
	And hereabouts he dwells,--which late I noted
	In tatter'd weeds, with overwhelming brows,
	Culling of simples; meagre were his looks,
	Sharp misery had worn him to the bones:
	And in his needy shop a tortoise hung,
	An alligator stuff'd, and other skins
	Of ill-shaped fishes; and about his shelves
	A beggarly account of empty boxes,
	Green earthen pots, bladders and musty seeds,
	Remnants of packthread and old cakes of roses,
	Were thinly scatter'd, to make up a show.
	Noting this penury, to myself I said
	'An if a man did need a poison now,
	Whose sale is present death in Mantua,
	Here lives a caitiff wretch would sell it him.'
	O, this same thought did but forerun my need;
	And this same needy man must sell it me.
	As I remember, this should be the house.
	Being holiday, the beggar's shop is shut.
	What, ho! apothecary!

	[Enter Apothecary]

Apothecary	Who calls so loud?

ROMEO	Come hither, man. I see that thou art poor:
	Hold, there is forty ducats: let me have
	A dram of poison, such soon-speeding gear
	As will disperse itself through all the veins
	That the life-weary taker may fall dead
	And that the trunk may be discharged of breath
	As violently as hasty powder fired
	Doth hurry from the fatal cannon's womb.

Apothecary	Such mortal drugs I have; but Mantua's law
	Is death to any he that utters them.

ROMEO	Art thou so bare and full of wretchedness,
	And fear'st to die? famine is in thy cheeks,
	Need and oppression starveth in thine eyes,
	Contempt and beggary hangs upon thy back;
	The world is not thy friend nor the world's law;
	The world affords no law to make thee rich;
	Then be not poor, but break it, and take this.

Apothecary	My poverty, but not my will, consents.

ROMEO	I pay thy poverty, and not thy will.

Apothecary	Put this in any liquid thing you will,
	And drink it off; and, if you had the strength
	Of twenty men, it would dispatch you straight.

ROMEO	There is thy gold, worse poison to men's souls,
	Doing more murders in this loathsome world,
	Than these poor compounds that thou mayst not sell.
	I sell thee poison; thou hast sold me none.
	Farewell: buy food, and get thyself in flesh.
	Come, cordial and not poison, go with me
	To Juliet's grave; for there must I use thee.

	[Exeunt]




	ROMEO AND JULIET


ACT V



SCENE II	Friar Laurence's cell.


	[Enter FRIAR JOHN]

FRIAR JOHN	Holy Franciscan friar! brother, ho!

	[Enter FRIAR LAURENCE]

FRIAR LAURENCE	This same should be the voice of Friar John.
	Welcome from Mantua: what says Romeo?
	Or, if his mind be writ, give me his letter.

FRIAR JOHN	Going to find a bare-foot brother out
	One of our order, to associate me,
	Here in this city visiting the sick,
	And finding him, the searchers of the town,
	Suspecting that we both were in a house
	Where the infectious pestilence did reign,
	Seal'd up the doors, and would not let us forth;
	So that my speed to Mantua there was stay'd.

FRIAR LAURENCE	Who bare my letter, then, to Romeo?

FRIAR JOHN	I could not send it,--here it is again,--
	Nor get a messenger to bring it thee,
	So fearful were they of infection.

FRIAR LAURENCE	Unhappy fortune! by my brotherhood,
	The letter was not nice but full of charge
	Of dear import, and the neglecting it
	May do much danger. Friar John, go hence;
	Get me an iron crow, and bring it straight
	Unto my cell.

FRIAR JOHN	Brother, I'll go and bring it thee.

	[Exit]

FRIAR LAURENCE	Now must I to the monument alone;
	Within three hours will fair Juliet wake:
	She will beshrew me much that Romeo
	Hath had no notice of these accidents;
	But I will write again to Mantua,
	And keep her at my cell till Romeo come;
	Poor living corse, closed in a dead man's tomb!

	[Exit]




	ROMEO AND JULIET


ACT V



SCENE III	A churchyard; in it a tomb belonging to the Capulets.


	[Enter PARIS, and his Page bearing flowers and a torch]

PARIS	Give me thy torch, boy: hence, and stand aloof:
	Yet put it out, for I would not be seen.
	Under yond yew-trees lay thee all along,
	Holding thine ear close to the hollow ground;
	So shall no foot upon the churchyard tread,
	Being loose, unfirm, with digging up of graves,
	But thou shalt hear it: whistle then to me,
	As signal that thou hear'st something approach.
	Give me those flowers. Do as I bid thee, go.

PAGE	[Aside]  I am almost afraid to stand alone
	Here in the churchyard; yet I will adventure.

	[Retires]

PARIS	Sweet flower, with flowers thy bridal bed I strew,--
	O woe! thy canopy is dust and stones;--
	Which with sweet water nightly I will dew,
	Or, wanting that, with tears distill'd by moans:
	The obsequies that I for thee will keep
	Nightly shall be to strew thy grave and weep.

	[The Page whistles]

	The boy gives warning something doth approach.
	What cursed foot wanders this way to-night,
	To cross my obsequies and true love's rite?
	What with a torch! muffle me, night, awhile.

	[Retires]

	[Enter ROMEO and BALTHASAR, with a torch,
	mattock, &c]

ROMEO	Give me that mattock and the wrenching iron.
	Hold, take this letter; early in the morning
	See thou deliver it to my lord and father.
	Give me the light: upon thy life, I charge thee,
	Whate'er thou hear'st or seest, stand all aloof,
	And do not interrupt me in my course.
	Why I descend into this bed of death,
	Is partly to behold my lady's face;
	But chiefly to take thence from her dead finger
	A precious ring, a ring that I must use
	In dear employment: therefore hence, be gone:
	But if thou, jealous, dost return to pry
	In what I further shall intend to do,
	By heaven, I will tear thee joint by joint
	And strew this hungry churchyard with thy limbs:
	The time and my intents are savage-wild,
	More fierce and more inexorable far
	Than empty tigers or the roaring sea.

BALTHASAR	I will be gone, sir, and not trouble you.

ROMEO	So shalt thou show me friendship. Take thou that:
	Live, and be prosperous: and farewell, good fellow.

BALTHASAR	[Aside]  For all this same, I'll hide me hereabout:
	His looks I fear, and his intents I doubt.

	[Retires]

ROMEO	Thou detestable maw, thou womb of death,
	Gorged with the dearest morsel of the earth,
	Thus I enforce thy rotten jaws to open,
	And, in despite, I'll cram thee with more food!

	[Opens the tomb]

PARIS	This is that banish'd haughty Montague,
	That murder'd my love's cousin, with which grief,
	It is supposed, the fair creature died;
	And here is come to do some villanous shame
	To the dead bodies: I will apprehend him.

	[Comes forward]

	Stop thy unhallow'd toil, vile Montague!
	Can vengeance be pursued further than death?
	Condemned villain, I do apprehend thee:
	Obey, and go with me; for thou must die.

ROMEO	I must indeed; and therefore came I hither.
	Good gentle youth, tempt not a desperate man;
	Fly hence, and leave me: think upon these gone;
	Let them affright thee. I beseech thee, youth,
	Put not another sin upon my head,
	By urging me to fury: O, be gone!
	By heaven, I love thee better than myself;
	For I come hither arm'd against myself:
	Stay not, be gone; live, and hereafter say,
	A madman's mercy bade thee run away.

PARIS	I do defy thy conjurations,
	And apprehend thee for a felon here.

ROMEO	Wilt thou provoke me? then have at thee, boy!

	[They fight]

PAGE	O Lord, they fight! I will go call the watch.

	[Exit]

PARIS	O, I am slain!

	[Falls]

	If thou be merciful,
	Open the tomb, lay me with Juliet.

	[Dies]

ROMEO	In faith, I will. Let me peruse this face.
	Mercutio's kinsman, noble County Paris!
	What said my man, when my betossed soul
	Did not attend him as we rode? I think
	He told me Paris should have married Juliet:
	Said he not so? or did I dream it so?
	Or am I mad, hearing him talk of Juliet,
	To think it was so? O, give me thy hand,
	One writ with me in sour misfortune's book!
	I'll bury thee in a triumphant grave;
	A grave? O no! a lantern, slaughter'd youth,
	For here lies Juliet, and her beauty makes
	This vault a feasting presence full of light.
	Death, lie thou there, by a dead man interr'd.

	[Laying PARIS in the tomb]

	How oft when men are at the point of death
	Have they been merry! which their keepers call
	A lightning before death: O, how may I
	Call this a lightning? O my love! my wife!
	Death, that hath suck'd the honey of thy breath,
	Hath had no power yet upon thy beauty:
	Thou art not conquer'd; beauty's ensign yet
	Is crimson in thy lips and in thy cheeks,
	And death's pale flag is not advanced there.
	Tybalt, liest thou there in thy bloody sheet?
	O, what more favour can I do to thee,
	Than with that hand that cut thy youth in twain
	To sunder his that was thine enemy?
	Forgive me, cousin! Ah, dear Juliet,
	Why art thou yet so fair? shall I believe
	That unsubstantial death is amorous,
	And that the lean abhorred monster keeps
	Thee here in dark to be his paramour?
	For fear of that, I still will stay with thee;
	And never from this palace of dim night
	Depart again: here, here will I remain
	With worms that are thy chamber-maids; O, here
	Will I set up my everlasting rest,
	And shake the yoke of inauspicious stars
	From this world-wearied flesh. Eyes, look your last!
	Arms, take your last embrace! and, lips, O you
	The doors of breath, seal with a righteous kiss
	A dateless bargain to engrossing death!
	Come, bitter conduct, come, unsavoury guide!
	Thou desperate pilot, now at once run on
	The dashing rocks thy sea-sick weary bark!
	Here's to my love!

	[Drinks]

	O true apothecary!
	Thy drugs are quick. Thus with a kiss I die.

	[Dies]

	[Enter, at the other end of the churchyard, FRIAR
	LAURENCE, with a lantern, crow, and spade]

FRIAR LAURENCE	Saint Francis be my speed! how oft to-night
	Have my old feet stumbled at graves! Who's there?

BALTHASAR	Here's one, a friend, and one that knows you well.

FRIAR LAURENCE	Bliss be upon you! Tell me, good my friend,
	What torch is yond, that vainly lends his light
	To grubs and eyeless skulls? as I discern,
	It burneth in the Capel's monument.

BALTHASAR	It doth so, holy sir; and there's my master,
	One that you love.

FRIAR LAURENCE	                  Who is it?

BALTHASAR	Romeo.

FRIAR LAURENCE	How long hath he been there?

BALTHASAR	Full half an hour.

FRIAR LAURENCE	Go with me to the vault.

BALTHASAR	I dare not, sir
	My master knows not but I am gone hence;
	And fearfully did menace me with death,
	If I did stay to look on his intents.

FRIAR LAURENCE	Stay, then; I'll go alone. Fear comes upon me:
	O, much I fear some ill unlucky thing.

BALTHASAR	As I did sleep under this yew-tree here,
	I dreamt my master and another fought,
	And that my master slew him.

FRIAR LAURENCE	Romeo!

	[Advances]

	Alack, alack, what blood is this, which stains
	The stony entrance of this sepulchre?
	What mean these masterless and gory swords
	To lie discolour'd by this place of peace?

	[Enters the tomb]

	Romeo! O, pale! Who else? what, Paris too?
	And steep'd in blood? Ah, what an unkind hour
	Is guilty of this lamentable chance!
	The lady stirs.

	[JULIET wakes]

JULIET	O comfortable friar! where is my lord?
	I do remember well where I should be,
	And there I am. Where is my Romeo?

	[Noise within]

FRIAR LAURENCE	I hear some noise. Lady, come from that nest
	Of death, contagion, and unnatural sleep:
	A greater power than we can contradict
	Hath thwarted our intents. Come, come away.
	Thy husband in thy bosom there lies dead;
	And Paris too. Come, I'll dispose of thee
	Among a sisterhood of holy nuns:
	Stay not to question, for the watch is coming;
	Come, go, good Juliet,

	[Noise again]

		 I dare no longer stay.

JULIET	Go, get thee hence, for I will not away.

	[Exit FRIAR LAURENCE]

	What's here? a cup, closed in my true love's hand?
	Poison, I see, hath been his timeless end:
	O churl! drunk all, and left no friendly drop
	To help me after? I will kiss thy lips;
	Haply some poison yet doth hang on them,
	To make die with a restorative.

	[Kisses him]

	Thy lips are warm.

First Watchman	[Within]  Lead, boy: which way?

JULIET	Yea, noise? then I'll be brief. O happy dagger!

	[Snatching ROMEO's dagger]

	This is thy sheath;

	[Stabs herself]

	there rust, and let me die.

	[Falls on ROMEO's body, and dies]

	[Enter Watch, with the Page of PARIS]

PAGE	This is the place; there, where the torch doth burn.

First Watchman	The ground is bloody; search about the churchyard:
	Go, some of you, whoe'er you find attach.
	Pitiful sight! here lies the county slain,
	And Juliet bleeding, warm, and newly dead,
	Who here hath lain these two days buried.
	Go, tell the prince: run to the Capulets:
	Raise up the Montagues: some others search:
	We see the ground whereon these woes do lie;
	But the true ground of all these piteous woes
	We cannot without circumstance descry.

	[Re-enter some of the Watch, with BALTHASAR]

Second Watchman	Here's Romeo's man; we found him in the churchyard.

First Watchman	Hold him in safety, till the prince come hither.

	[Re-enter others of the Watch, with FRIAR LAURENCE]

Third Watchman	Here is a friar, that trembles, sighs and weeps:
	We took this mattock and this spade from him,
	As he was coming from this churchyard side.

First Watchman	A great suspicion: stay the friar too.

	[Enter the PRINCE and Attendants]

PRINCE	What misadventure is so early up,
	That calls our person from our morning's rest?

	[Enter CAPULET, LADY CAPULET, and others]

CAPULET	What should it be, that they so shriek abroad?

LADY CAPULET	The people in the street cry Romeo,
	Some Juliet, and some Paris; and all run,
	With open outcry toward our monument.

PRINCE	What fear is this which startles in our ears?

First Watchman	Sovereign, here lies the County Paris slain;
	And Romeo dead; and Juliet, dead before,
	Warm and new kill'd.

PRINCE	Search, seek, and know how this foul murder comes.

First Watchman	Here is a friar, and slaughter'd Romeo's man;
	With instruments upon them, fit to open
	These dead men's tombs.

CAPULET	O heavens! O wife, look how our daughter bleeds!
	This dagger hath mista'en--for, lo, his house
	Is empty on the back of Montague,--
	And it mis-sheathed in my daughter's bosom!

LADY CAPULET	O me! this sight of death is as a bell,
	That warns my old age to a sepulchre.

	[Enter MONTAGUE and others]

PRINCE	Come, Montague; for thou art early up,
	To see thy son and heir more early down.

MONTAGUE	Alas, my liege, my wife is dead to-night;
	Grief of my son's exile hath stopp'd her breath:
	What further woe conspires against mine age?

PRINCE	Look, and thou shalt see.

MONTAGUE	O thou untaught! what manners is in this?
	To press before thy father to a grave?

PRINCE	Seal up the mouth of outrage for a while,
	Till we can clear these ambiguities,
	And know their spring, their head, their
	true descent;
	And then will I be general of your woes,
	And lead you even to death: meantime forbear,
	And let mischance be slave to patience.
	Bring forth the parties of suspicion.

FRIAR LAURENCE	I am the greatest, able to do least,
	Yet most suspected, as the time and place
	Doth make against me of this direful murder;
	And here I stand, both to impeach and purge
	Myself condemned and myself excused.

PRINCE	Then say at once what thou dost know in this.

FRIAR LAURENCE	I will be brief, for my short date of breath
	Is not so long as is a tedious tale.
	Romeo, there dead, was husband to that Juliet;
	And she, there dead, that Romeo's faithful wife:
	I married them; and their stol'n marriage-day
	Was Tybalt's dooms-day, whose untimely death
	Banish'd the new-made bridegroom from the city,
	For whom, and not for Tybalt, Juliet pined.
	You, to remove that siege of grief from her,
	Betroth'd and would have married her perforce
	To County Paris: then comes she to me,
	And, with wild looks, bid me devise some mean
	To rid her from this second marriage,
	Or in my cell there would she kill herself.
	Then gave I her, so tutor'd by my art,
	A sleeping potion; which so took effect
	As I intended, for it wrought on her
	The form of death: meantime I writ to Romeo,
	That he should hither come as this dire night,
	To help to take her from her borrow'd grave,
	Being the time the potion's force should cease.
	But he which bore my letter, Friar John,
	Was stay'd by accident, and yesternight
	Return'd my letter back. Then all alone
	At the prefixed hour of her waking,
	Came I to take her from her kindred's vault;
	Meaning to keep her closely at my cell,
	Till I conveniently could send to Romeo:
	But when I came, some minute ere the time
	Of her awaking, here untimely lay
	The noble Paris and true Romeo dead.
	She wakes; and I entreated her come forth,
	And bear this work of heaven with patience:
	But then a noise did scare me from the tomb;
	And she, too desperate, would not go with me,
	But, as it seems, did violence on herself.
	All this I know; and to the marriage
	Her nurse is privy: and, if aught in this
	Miscarried by my fault, let my old life
	Be sacrificed, some hour before his time,
	Unto the rigour of severest law.

PRINCE	We still have known thee for a holy man.
	Where's Romeo's man? what can he say in this?

BALTHASAR	I brought my master news of Juliet's death;
	And then in post he came from Mantua
	To this same place, to this same monument.
	This letter he early bid me give his father,
	And threatened me with death, going in the vault,
	I departed not and left him there.

PRINCE	Give me the letter; I will look on it.
	Where is the county's page, that raised the watch?
	Sirrah, what made your master in this place?

PAGE	He came with flowers to strew his lady's grave;
	And bid me stand aloof, and so I did:
	Anon comes one with light to ope the tomb;
	And by and by my master drew on him;
	And then I ran away to call the watch.

PRINCE	This letter doth make good the friar's words,
	Their course of love, the tidings of her death:
	And here he writes that he did buy a poison
	Of a poor 'pothecary, and therewithal
	Came to this vault to die, and lie with Juliet.
	Where be these enemies? Capulet! Montague!
	See, what a scourge is laid upon your hate,
	That heaven finds means to kill your joys with love.
	And I for winking at your discords too
	Have lost a brace of kinsmen: all are punish'd.

CAPULET	O brother Montague, give me thy hand:
	This is my daughter's jointure, for no more
	Can I demand.

MONTAGUE	                  But I can give thee more:
	For I will raise her statue in pure gold;
	That while Verona by that name is known,
	There shall no figure at such rate be set
	As that of true and faithful Juliet.

CAPULET	As rich shall Romeo's by his lady's lie;
	Poor sacrifices of our enmity!

PRINCE	A glooming peace this morning with it brings;
	The sun, for sorrow, will not show his head:
	Go hence, to have more talk of these sad things;
	Some shall be pardon'd, and some punished:
	For never was a story of more woe
	Than this of Juliet and her Romeo.

	[Exeunt]


	THE TEMPEST


	DRAMATIS PERSONAE


ALONSO	King of Naples.

SEBASTIAN	his brother.

PROSPERO	the right Duke of Milan.

ANTONIO	his brother, the usurping Duke of Milan.

FERDINAND	son to the King of Naples.

GONZALO	an honest old Counsellor.


ADRIAN	|
	|  Lords.
FRANCISCO	|


CALIBAN	a savage and deformed Slave.

TRINCULO	a Jester.

STEPHANO	a drunken Butler.

	Master of a Ship. (Master:)

	Boatswain. (Boatswain:)

	Mariners. (Mariners:)

MIRANDA	daughter to Prospero.

ARIEL	an airy Spirit.


IRIS	|
	|
CERES	|
	|
JUNO	|  presented by Spirits.
	|
Nymphs	|
	|
Reapers	|


	Other Spirits attending on Prospero.


SCENE	A ship at Sea: an island.




	THE TEMPEST


ACT I



SCENE I	On a ship at sea: a tempestuous noise
	of thunder and lightning heard.


	[Enter a Master and a Boatswain]

Master	Boatswain!

Boatswain	Here, master: what cheer?

Master	Good, speak to the mariners: fall to't, yarely,
	or we run ourselves aground: bestir, bestir.

	[Exit]

	[Enter Mariners]

Boatswain	Heigh, my hearts! cheerly, cheerly, my hearts!
	yare, yare! Take in the topsail. Tend to the
	master's whistle. Blow, till thou burst thy wind,
	if room enough!

	[Enter ALONSO, SEBASTIAN, ANTONIO, FERDINAND,
	GONZALO, and others]

ALONSO	Good boatswain, have care. Where's the master?
	Play the men.

Boatswain	I pray now, keep below.

ANTONIO	Where is the master, boatswain?

Boatswain	Do you not hear him? You mar our labour: keep your
	cabins: you do assist the storm.

GONZALO	Nay, good, be patient.

Boatswain	When the sea is. Hence! What cares these roarers
	for the name of king? To cabin: silence! trouble us not.

GONZALO	Good, yet remember whom thou hast aboard.

Boatswain	None that I more love than myself. You are a
	counsellor; if you can command these elements to
	silence, and work the peace of the present, we will
	not hand a rope more; use your authority: if you
	cannot, give thanks you have lived so long, and make
	yourself ready in your cabin for the mischance of
	the hour, if it so hap. Cheerly, good hearts! Out
	of our way, I say.

	[Exit]

GONZALO	I have great comfort from this fellow: methinks he
	hath no drowning mark upon him; his complexion is
	perfect gallows. Stand fast, good Fate, to his
	hanging: make the rope of his destiny our cable,
	for our own doth little advantage. If he be not
	born to be hanged, our case is miserable.

	[Exeunt]

	[Re-enter Boatswain]

Boatswain	Down with the topmast! yare! lower, lower! Bring
	her to try with main-course.

	[A cry within]

	A plague upon this howling! they are louder than
	the weather or our office.

	[Re-enter SEBASTIAN, ANTONIO, and GONZALO]

	Yet again! what do you here? Shall we give o'er
	and drown? Have you a mind to sink?

SEBASTIAN	A pox o' your throat, you bawling, blasphemous,
	incharitable dog!

Boatswain	Work you then.

ANTONIO	Hang, cur! hang, you whoreson, insolent noisemaker!
	We are less afraid to be drowned than thou art.

GONZALO	I'll warrant him for drowning; though the ship were
	no stronger than a nutshell and as leaky as an
	unstanched wench.

Boatswain	Lay her a-hold, a-hold! set her two courses off to
	sea again; lay her off.

	[Enter Mariners wet]

Mariners	All lost! to prayers, to prayers! all lost!

Boatswain	What, must our mouths be cold?

GONZALO	The king and prince at prayers! let's assist them,
	For our case is as theirs.

SEBASTIAN	I'm out of patience.

ANTONIO	We are merely cheated of our lives by drunkards:
	This wide-chapp'd rascal--would thou mightst lie drowning
	The washing of ten tides!

GONZALO	He'll be hang'd yet,
	Though every drop of water swear against it
	And gape at widest to glut him.

	[A confused noise within:   'Mercy on us!'--
	'We split, we split!'--'Farewell, my wife and
	children!'--
	'Farewell, brother!'--'We split, we split, we split!']

ANTONIO	Let's all sink with the king.

SEBASTIAN	Let's take leave of him.

	[Exeunt ANTONIO and SEBASTIAN]

GONZALO	Now would I give a thousand furlongs of sea for an
	acre of barren ground, long heath, brown furze, any
	thing. The wills above be done! but I would fain
	die a dry death.

	[Exeunt]




	THE TEMPEST


ACT I



SCENE II	The island. Before PROSPERO'S cell.


	[Enter PROSPERO and MIRANDA]

MIRANDA	If by your art, my dearest father, you have
	Put the wild waters in this roar, allay them.
	The sky, it seems, would pour down stinking pitch,
	But that the sea, mounting to the welkin's cheek,
	Dashes the fire out. O, I have suffered
	With those that I saw suffer: a brave vessel,
	Who had, no doubt, some noble creature in her,
	Dash'd all to pieces. O, the cry did knock
	Against my very heart. Poor souls, they perish'd.
	Had I been any god of power, I would
	Have sunk the sea within the earth or ere
	It should the good ship so have swallow'd and
	The fraughting souls within her.

PROSPERO	Be collected:
	No more amazement: tell your piteous heart
	There's no harm done.

MIRANDA	O, woe the day!

PROSPERO	No harm.
	I have done nothing but in care of thee,
	Of thee, my dear one, thee, my daughter, who
	Art ignorant of what thou art, nought knowing
	Of whence I am, nor that I am more better
	Than Prospero, master of a full poor cell,
	And thy no greater father.

MIRANDA	More to know
	Did never meddle with my thoughts.

PROSPERO	'Tis time
	I should inform thee farther. Lend thy hand,
	And pluck my magic garment from me. So:

	[Lays down his mantle]

	Lie there, my art. Wipe thou thine eyes; have comfort.
	The direful spectacle of the wreck, which touch'd
	The very virtue of compassion in thee,
	I have with such provision in mine art
	So safely ordered that there is no soul--
	No, not so much perdition as an hair
	Betid to any creature in the vessel
	Which thou heard'st cry, which thou saw'st sink. Sit down;
	For thou must now know farther.

MIRANDA	You have often
	Begun to tell me what I am, but stopp'd
	And left me to a bootless inquisition,
	Concluding 'Stay: not yet.'

PROSPERO	The hour's now come;
	The very minute bids thee ope thine ear;
	Obey and be attentive. Canst thou remember
	A time before we came unto this cell?
	I do not think thou canst, for then thou wast not
	Out three years old.

MIRANDA	Certainly, sir, I can.

PROSPERO	By what? by any other house or person?
	Of any thing the image tell me that
	Hath kept with thy remembrance.

MIRANDA	'Tis far off
	And rather like a dream than an assurance
	That my remembrance warrants. Had I not
	Four or five women once that tended me?

PROSPERO	Thou hadst, and more, Miranda. But how is it
	That this lives in thy mind? What seest thou else
	In the dark backward and abysm of time?
	If thou remember'st aught ere thou camest here,
	How thou camest here thou mayst.

MIRANDA	But that I do not.

PROSPERO	Twelve year since, Miranda, twelve year since,
	Thy father was the Duke of Milan and
	A prince of power.

MIRANDA	                  Sir, are not you my father?

PROSPERO	Thy mother was a piece of virtue, and
	She said thou wast my daughter; and thy father
	Was Duke of Milan; and thou his only heir
	And princess no worse issued.

MIRANDA	O the heavens!
	What foul play had we, that we came from thence?
	Or blessed was't we did?

PROSPERO	Both, both, my girl:
	By foul play, as thou say'st, were we heaved thence,
	But blessedly holp hither.

MIRANDA	O, my heart bleeds
	To think o' the teen that I have turn'd you to,
	Which is from my remembrance! Please you, farther.

PROSPERO	My brother and thy uncle, call'd Antonio--
	I pray thee, mark me--that a brother should
	Be so perfidious!--he whom next thyself
	Of all the world I loved and to him put
	The manage of my state; as at that time
	Through all the signories it was the first
	And Prospero the prime duke, being so reputed
	In dignity, and for the liberal arts
	Without a parallel; those being all my study,
	The government I cast upon my brother
	And to my state grew stranger, being transported
	And rapt in secret studies. Thy false uncle--
	Dost thou attend me?

MIRANDA	Sir, most heedfully.

PROSPERO	Being once perfected how to grant suits,
	How to deny them, who to advance and who
	To trash for over-topping, new created
	The creatures that were mine, I say, or changed 'em,
	Or else new form'd 'em; having both the key
	Of officer and office, set all hearts i' the state
	To what tune pleased his ear; that now he was
	The ivy which had hid my princely trunk,
	And suck'd my verdure out on't. Thou attend'st not.

MIRANDA	O, good sir, I do.

PROSPERO	                  I pray thee, mark me.
	I, thus neglecting worldly ends, all dedicated
	To closeness and the bettering of my mind
	With that which, but by being so retired,
	O'er-prized all popular rate, in my false brother
	Awaked an evil nature; and my trust,
	Like a good parent, did beget of him
	A falsehood in its contrary as great
	As my trust was; which had indeed no limit,
	A confidence sans bound. He being thus lorded,
	Not only with what my revenue yielded,
	But what my power might else exact, like one
	Who having into truth, by telling of it,
	Made such a sinner of his memory,
	To credit his own lie, he did believe
	He was indeed the duke; out o' the substitution
	And executing the outward face of royalty,
	With all prerogative: hence his ambition growing--
	Dost thou hear?

MIRANDA	                  Your tale, sir, would cure deafness.

PROSPERO	To have no screen between this part he play'd
	And him he play'd it for, he needs will be
	Absolute Milan. Me, poor man, my library
	Was dukedom large enough: of temporal royalties
	He thinks me now incapable; confederates--
	So dry he was for sway--wi' the King of Naples
	To give him annual tribute, do him homage,
	Subject his coronet to his crown and bend
	The dukedom yet unbow'd--alas, poor Milan!--
	To most ignoble stooping.

MIRANDA	O the heavens!

PROSPERO	Mark his condition and the event; then tell me
	If this might be a brother.

MIRANDA	I should sin
	To think but nobly of my grandmother:
	Good wombs have borne bad sons.

PROSPERO	Now the condition.
	The King of Naples, being an enemy
	To me inveterate, hearkens my brother's suit;
	Which was, that he, in lieu o' the premises
	Of homage and I know not how much tribute,
	Should presently extirpate me and mine
	Out of the dukedom and confer fair Milan
	With all the honours on my brother: whereon,
	A treacherous army levied, one midnight
	Fated to the purpose did Antonio open
	The gates of Milan, and, i' the dead of darkness,
	The ministers for the purpose hurried thence
	Me and thy crying self.

MIRANDA	Alack, for pity!
	I, not remembering how I cried out then,
	Will cry it o'er again: it is a hint
	That wrings mine eyes to't.

PROSPERO	Hear a little further
	And then I'll bring thee to the present business
	Which now's upon's; without the which this story
	Were most impertinent.

MIRANDA	Wherefore did they not
	That hour destroy us?

PROSPERO	Well demanded, wench:
	My tale provokes that question. Dear, they durst not,
	So dear the love my people bore me, nor set
	A mark so bloody on the business, but
	With colours fairer painted their foul ends.
	In few, they hurried us aboard a bark,
	Bore us some leagues to sea; where they prepared
	A rotten carcass of a boat, not rigg'd,
	Nor tackle, sail, nor mast; the very rats
	Instinctively had quit it: there they hoist us,
	To cry to the sea that roar'd to us, to sigh
	To the winds whose pity, sighing back again,
	Did us but loving wrong.

MIRANDA	Alack, what trouble
	Was I then to you!

PROSPERO	                  O, a cherubim
	Thou wast that did preserve me. Thou didst smile.
	Infused with a fortitude from heaven,
	When I have deck'd the sea with drops full salt,
	Under my burthen groan'd; which raised in me
	An undergoing stomach, to bear up
	Against what should ensue.

MIRANDA	How came we ashore?

PROSPERO	By Providence divine.
	Some food we had and some fresh water that
	A noble Neapolitan, Gonzalo,
	Out of his charity, being then appointed
	Master of this design, did give us, with
	Rich garments, linens, stuffs and necessaries,
	Which since have steaded much; so, of his gentleness,
	Knowing I loved my books, he furnish'd me
	From mine own library with volumes that
	I prize above my dukedom.

MIRANDA	Would I might
	But ever see that man!

PROSPERO	Now I arise:

	[Resumes his mantle]

	Sit still, and hear the last of our sea-sorrow.
	Here in this island we arrived; and here
	Have I, thy schoolmaster, made thee more profit
	Than other princesses can that have more time
	For vainer hours and tutors not so careful.

MIRANDA	Heavens thank you for't! And now, I pray you, sir,
	For still 'tis beating in my mind, your reason
	For raising this sea-storm?

PROSPERO	Know thus far forth.
	By accident most strange, bountiful Fortune,
	Now my dear lady, hath mine enemies
	Brought to this shore; and by my prescience
	I find my zenith doth depend upon
	A most auspicious star, whose influence
	If now I court not but omit, my fortunes
	Will ever after droop. Here cease more questions:
	Thou art inclined to sleep; 'tis a good dulness,
	And give it way: I know thou canst not choose.

	[MIRANDA sleeps]

	Come away, servant, come. I am ready now.
	Approach, my Ariel, come.

	[Enter ARIEL]

ARIEL	All hail, great master! grave sir, hail! I come
	To answer thy best pleasure; be't to fly,
	To swim, to dive into the fire, to ride
	On the curl'd clouds, to thy strong bidding task
	Ariel and all his quality.

PROSPERO	Hast thou, spirit,
	Perform'd to point the tempest that I bade thee?

ARIEL	To every article.
	I boarded the king's ship; now on the beak,
	Now in the waist, the deck, in every cabin,
	I flamed amazement: sometime I'ld divide,
	And burn in many places; on the topmast,
	The yards and bowsprit, would I flame distinctly,
	Then meet and join. Jove's lightnings, the precursors
	O' the dreadful thunder-claps, more momentary
	And sight-outrunning were not; the fire and cracks
	Of sulphurous roaring the most mighty Neptune
	Seem to besiege and make his bold waves tremble,
	Yea, his dread trident shake.

PROSPERO	My brave spirit!
	Who was so firm, so constant, that this coil
	Would not infect his reason?

ARIEL	Not a soul
	But felt a fever of the mad and play'd
	Some tricks of desperation. All but mariners
	Plunged in the foaming brine and quit the vessel,
	Then all afire with me: the king's son, Ferdinand,
	With hair up-staring,--then like reeds, not hair,--
	Was the first man that leap'd; cried, 'Hell is empty
	And all the devils are here.'

PROSPERO	Why that's my spirit!
	But was not this nigh shore?

ARIEL	Close by, my master.

PROSPERO	But are they, Ariel, safe?

ARIEL	Not a hair perish'd;
	On their sustaining garments not a blemish,
	But fresher than before: and, as thou badest me,
	In troops I have dispersed them 'bout the isle.
	The king's son have I landed by himself;
	Whom I left cooling of the air with sighs
	In an odd angle of the isle and sitting,
	His arms in this sad knot.

PROSPERO	Of the king's ship
	The mariners say how thou hast disposed
	And all the rest o' the fleet.

ARIEL	Safely in harbour
	Is the king's ship; in the deep nook, where once
	Thou call'dst me up at midnight to fetch dew
	From the still-vex'd Bermoothes, there she's hid:
	The mariners all under hatches stow'd;
	Who, with a charm join'd to their suffer'd labour,
	I have left asleep; and for the rest o' the fleet
	Which I dispersed, they all have met again
	And are upon the Mediterranean flote,
	Bound sadly home for Naples,
	Supposing that they saw the king's ship wreck'd
	And his great person perish.

PROSPERO	Ariel, thy charge
	Exactly is perform'd: but there's more work.
	What is the time o' the day?

ARIEL	Past the mid season.

PROSPERO	At least two glasses. The time 'twixt six and now
	Must by us both be spent most preciously.

ARIEL	Is there more toil? Since thou dost give me pains,
	Let me remember thee what thou hast promised,
	Which is not yet perform'd me.

PROSPERO	How now? moody?
	What is't thou canst demand?

ARIEL	My liberty.

PROSPERO	Before the time be out? no more!

ARIEL	I prithee,
	Remember I have done thee worthy service;
	Told thee no lies, made thee no mistakings, served
	Without or grudge or grumblings: thou didst promise
	To bate me a full year.

PROSPERO	Dost thou forget
	From what a torment I did free thee?

ARIEL	No.

PROSPERO	Thou dost, and think'st it much to tread the ooze
	Of the salt deep,
	To run upon the sharp wind of the north,
	To do me business in the veins o' the earth
	When it is baked with frost.

ARIEL	I do not, sir.

PROSPERO	Thou liest, malignant thing! Hast thou forgot
	The foul witch Sycorax, who with age and envy
	Was grown into a hoop? hast thou forgot her?

ARIEL	No, sir.

PROSPERO	     Thou hast. Where was she born? speak; tell me.

ARIEL	Sir, in Argier.

PROSPERO	                  O, was she so? I must
	Once in a month recount what thou hast been,
	Which thou forget'st. This damn'd witch Sycorax,
	For mischiefs manifold and sorceries terrible
	To enter human hearing, from Argier,
	Thou know'st, was banish'd: for one thing she did
	They would not take her life. Is not this true?

ARIEL	Ay, sir.

PROSPERO	This blue-eyed hag was hither brought with child
	And here was left by the sailors. Thou, my slave,
	As thou report'st thyself, wast then her servant;
	And, for thou wast a spirit too delicate
	To act her earthy and abhorr'd commands,
	Refusing her grand hests, she did confine thee,
	By help of her more potent ministers
	And in her most unmitigable rage,
	Into a cloven pine; within which rift
	Imprison'd thou didst painfully remain
	A dozen years; within which space she died
	And left thee there; where thou didst vent thy groans
	As fast as mill-wheels strike. Then was this island--
	Save for the son that she did litter here,
	A freckled whelp hag-born--not honour'd with
	A human shape.

ARIEL	                  Yes, Caliban her son.

PROSPERO	Dull thing, I say so; he, that Caliban
	Whom now I keep in service. Thou best know'st
	What torment I did find thee in; thy groans
	Did make wolves howl and penetrate the breasts
	Of ever angry bears: it was a torment
	To lay upon the damn'd, which Sycorax
	Could not again undo: it was mine art,
	When I arrived and heard thee, that made gape
	The pine and let thee out.

ARIEL	I thank thee, master.

PROSPERO	If thou more murmur'st, I will rend an oak
	And peg thee in his knotty entrails till
	Thou hast howl'd away twelve winters.

ARIEL	Pardon, master;
	I will be correspondent to command
	And do my spiriting gently.

PROSPERO	Do so, and after two days
	I will discharge thee.

ARIEL	That's my noble master!
	What shall I do? say what; what shall I do?

PROSPERO	Go make thyself like a nymph o' the sea: be subject
	To no sight but thine and mine, invisible
	To every eyeball else. Go take this shape
	And hither come in't: go, hence with diligence!

	[Exit ARIEL]

	Awake, dear heart, awake! thou hast slept well; Awake!

MIRANDA	     The strangeness of your story put
	Heaviness in me.

PROSPERO	                  Shake it off. Come on;
	We'll visit Caliban my slave, who never
	Yields us kind answer.

MIRANDA	'Tis a villain, sir,
	I do not love to look on.

PROSPERO	But, as 'tis,
	We cannot miss him: he does make our fire,
	Fetch in our wood and serves in offices
	That profit us. What, ho! slave! Caliban!
	Thou earth, thou! speak.

CALIBAN	[Within]  There's wood enough within.

PROSPERO	Come forth, I say! there's other business for thee:
	Come, thou tortoise! when?

	[Re-enter ARIEL like a water-nymph]

	Fine apparition! My quaint Ariel,
	Hark in thine ear.

ARIEL	                  My lord it shall be done.

	[Exit]

PROSPERO	Thou poisonous slave, got by the devil himself
	Upon thy wicked dam, come forth!

	[Enter CALIBAN]

CALIBAN	As wicked dew as e'er my mother brush'd
	With raven's feather from unwholesome fen
	Drop on you both! a south-west blow on ye
	And blister you all o'er!

PROSPERO	For this, be sure, to-night thou shalt have cramps,
	Side-stitches that shall pen thy breath up; urchins
	Shall, for that vast of night that they may work,
	All exercise on thee; thou shalt be pinch'd
	As thick as honeycomb, each pinch more stinging
	Than bees that made 'em.

CALIBAN	I must eat my dinner.
	This island's mine, by Sycorax my mother,
	Which thou takest from me. When thou camest first,
	Thou strokedst me and madest much of me, wouldst give me
	Water with berries in't, and teach me how
	To name the bigger light, and how the less,
	That burn by day and night: and then I loved thee
	And show'd thee all the qualities o' the isle,
	The fresh springs, brine-pits, barren place and fertile:
	Cursed be I that did so! All the charms
	Of Sycorax, toads, beetles, bats, light on you!
	For I am all the subjects that you have,
	Which first was mine own king: and here you sty me
	In this hard rock, whiles you do keep from me
	The rest o' the island.

PROSPERO	Thou most lying slave,
	Whom stripes may move, not kindness! I have used thee,
	Filth as thou art, with human care, and lodged thee
	In mine own cell, till thou didst seek to violate
	The honour of my child.

CALIBAN	O ho, O ho! would't had been done!
	Thou didst prevent me; I had peopled else
	This isle with Calibans.

PROSPERO	Abhorred slave,
	Which any print of goodness wilt not take,
	Being capable of all ill! I pitied thee,
	Took pains to make thee speak, taught thee each hour
	One thing or other: when thou didst not, savage,
	Know thine own meaning, but wouldst gabble like
	A thing most brutish, I endow'd thy purposes
	With words that made them known. But thy vile race,
	Though thou didst learn, had that in't which
	good natures
	Could not abide to be with; therefore wast thou
	Deservedly confined into this rock,
	Who hadst deserved more than a prison.

CALIBAN	You taught me language; and my profit on't
	Is, I know how to curse. The red plague rid you
	For learning me your language!

PROSPERO	Hag-seed, hence!
	Fetch us in fuel; and be quick, thou'rt best,
	To answer other business. Shrug'st thou, malice?
	If thou neglect'st or dost unwillingly
	What I command, I'll rack thee with old cramps,
	Fill all thy bones with aches, make thee roar
	That beasts shall tremble at thy din.

CALIBAN	No, pray thee.

	[Aside]

	I must obey: his art is of such power,
	It would control my dam's god, Setebos,
	and make a vassal of him.

PROSPERO	So, slave; hence!

	[Exit CALIBAN]

	[Re-enter ARIEL, invisible, playing and singing;
	FERDINAND following]

	ARIEL'S song.

	Come unto these yellow sands,
	And then take hands:
	Courtsied when you have and kiss'd
	The wild waves whist,
	Foot it featly here and there;
	And, sweet sprites, the burthen bear.
	Hark, hark!

	[Burthen [dispersedly, within]  Bow-wow]

	The watch-dogs bark!

	[Burthen Bow-wow]

	Hark, hark! I hear
	The strain of strutting chanticleer
	Cry, Cock-a-diddle-dow.

FERDINAND	Where should this music be? i' the air or the earth?
	It sounds no more: and sure, it waits upon
	Some god o' the island. Sitting on a bank,
	Weeping again the king my father's wreck,
	This music crept by me upon the waters,
	Allaying both their fury and my passion
	With its sweet air: thence I have follow'd it,
	Or it hath drawn me rather. But 'tis gone.
	No, it begins again.

	[ARIEL sings]

	Full fathom five thy father lies;
	Of his bones are coral made;
	Those are pearls that were his eyes:
	Nothing of him that doth fade
	But doth suffer a sea-change
	Into something rich and strange.
	Sea-nymphs hourly ring his knell

	[Burthen Ding-dong]

	Hark! now I hear them,--Ding-dong, bell.

FERDINAND	The ditty does remember my drown'd father.
	This is no mortal business, nor no sound
	That the earth owes. I hear it now above me.

PROSPERO	The fringed curtains of thine eye advance
	And say what thou seest yond.

MIRANDA	What is't? a spirit?
	Lord, how it looks about! Believe me, sir,
	It carries a brave form. But 'tis a spirit.

PROSPERO	No, wench; it eats and sleeps and hath such senses
	As we have, such. This gallant which thou seest
	Was in the wreck; and, but he's something stain'd
	With grief that's beauty's canker, thou mightst call him
	A goodly person: he hath lost his fellows
	And strays about to find 'em.

MIRANDA	I might call him
	A thing divine, for nothing natural
	I ever saw so noble.

PROSPERO	[Aside] It goes on, I see,
	As my soul prompts it. Spirit, fine spirit! I'll free thee
	Within two days for this.

FERDINAND	Most sure, the goddess
	On whom these airs attend! Vouchsafe my prayer
	May know if you remain upon this island;
	And that you will some good instruction give
	How I may bear me here: my prime request,
	Which I do last pronounce, is, O you wonder!
	If you be maid or no?

MIRANDA	No wonder, sir;
	But certainly a maid.

FERDINAND	My language! heavens!
	I am the best of them that speak this speech,
	Were I but where 'tis spoken.

PROSPERO	How? the best?
	What wert thou, if the King of Naples heard thee?

FERDINAND	A single thing, as I am now, that wonders
	To hear thee speak of Naples. He does hear me;
	And that he does I weep: myself am Naples,
	Who with mine eyes, never since at ebb, beheld
	The king my father wreck'd.

MIRANDA	Alack, for mercy!

FERDINAND	Yes, faith, and all his lords; the Duke of Milan
	And his brave son being twain.

PROSPERO	[Aside]	The Duke of Milan
	And his more braver daughter could control thee,
	If now 'twere fit to do't. At the first sight
	They have changed eyes. Delicate Ariel,
	I'll set thee free for this.

	[To FERDINAND]

		        A word, good sir;
	I fear you have done yourself some wrong: a word.

MIRANDA	Why speaks my father so ungently? This
	Is the third man that e'er I saw, the first
	That e'er I sigh'd for: pity move my father
	To be inclined my way!

FERDINAND	O, if a virgin,
	And your affection not gone forth, I'll make you
	The queen of Naples.

PROSPERO	Soft, sir! one word more.

	[Aside]

	They are both in either's powers; but this swift business
	I must uneasy make, lest too light winning
	Make the prize light.

	[To FERDINAND]

		One word more; I charge thee
	That thou attend me: thou dost here usurp
	The name thou owest not; and hast put thyself
	Upon this island as a spy, to win it
	From me, the lord on't.

FERDINAND	No, as I am a man.

MIRANDA	There's nothing ill can dwell in such a temple:
	If the ill spirit have so fair a house,
	Good things will strive to dwell with't.

PROSPERO	Follow me.
	Speak not you for him; he's a traitor. Come;
	I'll manacle thy neck and feet together:
	Sea-water shalt thou drink; thy food shall be
	The fresh-brook muscles, wither'd roots and husks
	Wherein the acorn cradled. Follow.

FERDINAND	No;
	I will resist such entertainment till
	Mine enemy has more power.

	[Draws, and is charmed from moving]

MIRANDA	O dear father,
	Make not too rash a trial of him, for
	He's gentle and not fearful.

PROSPERO	What? I say,
	My foot my tutor? Put thy sword up, traitor;
	Who makest a show but darest not strike, thy conscience
	Is so possess'd with guilt: come from thy ward,
	For I can here disarm thee with this stick
	And make thy weapon drop.

MIRANDA	Beseech you, father.

PROSPERO	Hence! hang not on my garments.

MIRANDA	Sir, have pity;
	I'll be his surety.

PROSPERO	Silence! one word more
	Shall make me chide thee, if not hate thee. What!
	An advocate for an imposter! hush!
	Thou think'st there is no more such shapes as he,
	Having seen but him and Caliban: foolish wench!
	To the most of men this is a Caliban
	And they to him are angels.

MIRANDA	My affections
	Are then most humble; I have no ambition
	To see a goodlier man.

PROSPERO	Come on; obey:
	Thy nerves are in their infancy again
	And have no vigour in them.

FERDINAND	So they are;
	My spirits, as in a dream, are all bound up.
	My father's loss, the weakness which I feel,
	The wreck of all my friends, nor this man's threats,
	To whom I am subdued, are but light to me,
	Might I but through my prison once a day
	Behold this maid: all corners else o' the earth
	Let liberty make use of; space enough
	Have I in such a prison.

PROSPERO	[Aside]                It works.

	[To FERDINAND]

		                  Come on.
	Thou hast done well, fine Ariel!

	[To FERDINAND]

		                  Follow me.

	[To ARIEL]

	Hark what thou else shalt do me.

MIRANDA	Be of comfort;
	My father's of a better nature, sir,
	Than he appears by speech: this is unwonted
	Which now came from him.

PROSPERO	Thou shalt be free
	As mountain winds: but then exactly do
	All points of my command.

ARIEL	To the syllable.

PROSPERO	Come, follow. Speak not for him.

	[Exeunt]




	THE TEMPEST


ACT II



SCENE I	Another part of the island.


	[Enter ALONSO, SEBASTIAN, ANTONIO, GONZALO,
	ADRIAN, FRANCISCO, and others]

GONZALO	Beseech you, sir, be merry; you have cause,
	So have we all, of joy; for our escape
	Is much beyond our loss. Our hint of woe
	Is common; every day some sailor's wife,
	The masters of some merchant and the merchant
	Have just our theme of woe; but for the miracle,
	I mean our preservation, few in millions
	Can speak like us: then wisely, good sir, weigh
	Our sorrow with our comfort.

ALONSO	Prithee, peace.

SEBASTIAN	He receives comfort like cold porridge.

ANTONIO	The visitor will not give him o'er so.

SEBASTIAN	Look he's winding up the watch of his wit;
	by and by it will strike.

GONZALO	Sir,--

SEBASTIAN	One: tell.

GONZALO	When every grief is entertain'd that's offer'd,
	Comes to the entertainer--

SEBASTIAN	A dollar.

GONZALO	Dolour comes to him, indeed: you
	have spoken truer than you purposed.

SEBASTIAN	You have taken it wiselier than I meant you should.

GONZALO	Therefore, my lord,--

ANTONIO	Fie, what a spendthrift is he of his tongue!

ALONSO	I prithee, spare.

GONZALO	Well, I have done: but yet,--

SEBASTIAN	He will be talking.

ANTONIO	Which, of he or Adrian, for a good
	wager, first begins to crow?

SEBASTIAN	The old cock.

ANTONIO	The cockerel.

SEBASTIAN	Done. The wager?

ANTONIO	A laughter.

SEBASTIAN	A match!

ADRIAN	Though this island seem to be desert,--

SEBASTIAN	Ha, ha, ha! So, you're paid.

ADRIAN	Uninhabitable and almost inaccessible,--

SEBASTIAN	Yet,--

ADRIAN	Yet,--

ANTONIO	He could not miss't.

ADRIAN	It must needs be of subtle, tender and delicate
	temperance.

ANTONIO	Temperance was a delicate wench.

SEBASTIAN	Ay, and a subtle; as he most learnedly delivered.

ADRIAN	The air breathes upon us here most sweetly.

SEBASTIAN	As if it had lungs and rotten ones.

ANTONIO	Or as 'twere perfumed by a fen.

GONZALO	Here is everything advantageous to life.

ANTONIO	True; save means to live.

SEBASTIAN	Of that there's none, or little.

GONZALO	How lush and lusty the grass looks! how green!

ANTONIO	The ground indeed is tawny.

SEBASTIAN	With an eye of green in't.

ANTONIO	He misses not much.

SEBASTIAN	No; he doth but mistake the truth totally.

GONZALO	But the rarity of it is,--which is indeed almost
	beyond credit,--

SEBASTIAN	As many vouched rarities are.

GONZALO	That our garments, being, as they were, drenched in
	the sea, hold notwithstanding their freshness and
	glosses, being rather new-dyed than stained with
	salt water.

ANTONIO	If but one of his pockets could speak, would it not
	say he lies?

SEBASTIAN	Ay, or very falsely pocket up his report

GONZALO	Methinks our garments are now as fresh as when we
	put them on first in Afric, at the marriage of
	the king's fair daughter Claribel to the King of Tunis.

SEBASTIAN	'Twas a sweet marriage, and we prosper well in our return.

ADRIAN	Tunis was never graced before with such a paragon to
	their queen.

GONZALO	Not since widow Dido's time.

ANTONIO	Widow! a pox o' that! How came that widow in?
	widow Dido!

SEBASTIAN	What if he had said 'widower AEneas' too? Good Lord,
	how you take it!

ADRIAN	'Widow Dido' said you? you make me study of that:
	she was of Carthage, not of Tunis.

GONZALO	This Tunis, sir, was Carthage.

ADRIAN	Carthage?

GONZALO	I assure you, Carthage.

SEBASTIAN	His word is more than the miraculous harp; he hath
	raised the wall and houses too.

ANTONIO	What impossible matter will he make easy next?

SEBASTIAN	I think he will carry this island home in his pocket
	and give it his son for an apple.

ANTONIO	And, sowing the kernels of it in the sea, bring
	forth more islands.

GONZALO	Ay.

ANTONIO	Why, in good time.

GONZALO	Sir, we were talking that our garments seem now
	as fresh as when we were at Tunis at the marriage
	of your daughter, who is now queen.

ANTONIO	And the rarest that e'er came there.

SEBASTIAN	Bate, I beseech you, widow Dido.

ANTONIO	O, widow Dido! ay, widow Dido.

GONZALO	Is not, sir, my doublet as fresh as the first day I
	wore it? I mean, in a sort.

ANTONIO	That sort was well fished for.

GONZALO	When I wore it at your daughter's marriage?

ALONSO	You cram these words into mine ears against
	The stomach of my sense. Would I had never
	Married my daughter there! for, coming thence,
	My son is lost and, in my rate, she too,
	Who is so far from Italy removed
	I ne'er again shall see her. O thou mine heir
	Of Naples and of Milan, what strange fish
	Hath made his meal on thee?

FRANCISCO	Sir, he may live:
	I saw him beat the surges under him,
	And ride upon their backs; he trod the water,
	Whose enmity he flung aside, and breasted
	The surge most swoln that met him; his bold head
	'Bove the contentious waves he kept, and oar'd
	Himself with his good arms in lusty stroke
	To the shore, that o'er his wave-worn basis bow'd,
	As stooping to relieve him: I not doubt
	He came alive to land.

ALONSO	No, no, he's gone.

SEBASTIAN	Sir, you may thank yourself for this great loss,
	That would not bless our Europe with your daughter,
	But rather lose her to an African;
	Where she at least is banish'd from your eye,
	Who hath cause to wet the grief on't.

ALONSO	Prithee, peace.

SEBASTIAN	You were kneel'd to and importuned otherwise
	By all of us, and the fair soul herself
	Weigh'd between loathness and obedience, at
	Which end o' the beam should bow. We have lost your
	son,
	I fear, for ever: Milan and Naples have
	More widows in them of this business' making
	Than we bring men to comfort them:
	The fault's your own.

ALONSO	So is the dear'st o' the loss.

GONZALO	My lord Sebastian,
	The truth you speak doth lack some gentleness
	And time to speak it in: you rub the sore,
	When you should bring the plaster.

SEBASTIAN	Very well.

ANTONIO	And most chirurgeonly.

GONZALO	It is foul weather in us all, good sir,
	When you are cloudy.

SEBASTIAN	Foul weather?

ANTONIO	Very foul.

GONZALO	Had I plantation of this isle, my lord,--

ANTONIO	He'ld sow't with nettle-seed.

SEBASTIAN	Or docks, or mallows.

GONZALO	And were the king on't, what would I do?

SEBASTIAN	'Scape being drunk for want of wine.

GONZALO	I' the commonwealth I would by contraries
	Execute all things; for no kind of traffic
	Would I admit; no name of magistrate;
	Letters should not be known; riches, poverty,
	And use of service, none; contract, succession,
	Bourn, bound of land, tilth, vineyard, none;
	No use of metal, corn, or wine, or oil;
	No occupation; all men idle, all;
	And women too, but innocent and pure;
	No sovereignty;--

SEBASTIAN	                  Yet he would be king on't.

ANTONIO	The latter end of his commonwealth forgets the
	beginning.

GONZALO	All things in common nature should produce
	Without sweat or endeavour: treason, felony,
	Sword, pike, knife, gun, or need of any engine,
	Would I not have; but nature should bring forth,
	Of its own kind, all foison, all abundance,
	To feed my innocent people.

SEBASTIAN	No marrying 'mong his subjects?

ANTONIO	None, man; all idle: whores and knaves.

GONZALO	I would with such perfection govern, sir,
	To excel the golden age.

SEBASTIAN	God save his majesty!

ANTONIO	Long live Gonzalo!

GONZALO	                  And,--do you mark me, sir?

ALONSO	Prithee, no more: thou dost talk nothing to me.

GONZALO	I do well believe your highness; and
	did it to minister occasion to these gentlemen,
	who are of such sensible and nimble lungs that
	they always use to laugh at nothing.

ANTONIO	'Twas you we laughed at.

GONZALO	Who in this kind of merry fooling am nothing
	to you: so you may continue and laugh at
	nothing still.

ANTONIO	What a blow was there given!

SEBASTIAN	An it had not fallen flat-long.

GONZALO	You are gentlemen of brave metal; you would lift
	the moon out of her sphere, if she would continue
	in it five weeks without changing.

	[Enter ARIEL, invisible, playing solemn music]

SEBASTIAN	We would so, and then go a bat-fowling.

ANTONIO	Nay, good my lord, be not angry.

GONZALO	No, I warrant you; I will not adventure
	my discretion so weakly. Will you laugh
	me asleep, for I am very heavy?

ANTONIO	Go sleep, and hear us.

	[All sleep except ALONSO, SEBASTIAN, and ANTONIO]

ALONSO	What, all so soon asleep! I wish mine eyes
	Would, with themselves, shut up my thoughts: I find
	They are inclined to do so.

SEBASTIAN	Please you, sir,
	Do not omit the heavy offer of it:
	It seldom visits sorrow; when it doth,
	It is a comforter.

ANTONIO	                  We two, my lord,
	Will guard your person while you take your rest,
	And watch your safety.

ALONSO	Thank you. Wondrous heavy.

	[ALONSO sleeps. Exit ARIEL]

SEBASTIAN	What a strange drowsiness possesses them!

ANTONIO	It is the quality o' the climate.

SEBASTIAN	Why
	Doth it not then our eyelids sink? I find not
	Myself disposed to sleep.

ANTONIO	Nor I; my spirits are nimble.
	They fell together all, as by consent;
	They dropp'd, as by a thunder-stroke. What might,
	Worthy Sebastian? O, what might?--No more:--
	And yet me thinks I see it in thy face,
	What thou shouldst be: the occasion speaks thee, and
	My strong imagination sees a crown
	Dropping upon thy head.

SEBASTIAN	What, art thou waking?

ANTONIO	Do you not hear me speak?

SEBASTIAN	I do; and surely
	It is a sleepy language and thou speak'st
	Out of thy sleep. What is it thou didst say?
	This is a strange repose, to be asleep
	With eyes wide open; standing, speaking, moving,
	And yet so fast asleep.

ANTONIO	Noble Sebastian,
	Thou let'st thy fortune sleep--die, rather; wink'st
	Whiles thou art waking.

SEBASTIAN	Thou dost snore distinctly;
	There's meaning in thy snores.

ANTONIO	I am more serious than my custom: you
	Must be so too, if heed me; which to do
	Trebles thee o'er.

SEBASTIAN	                  Well, I am standing water.

ANTONIO	I'll teach you how to flow.

SEBASTIAN	Do so: to ebb
	Hereditary sloth instructs me.

ANTONIO	O,
	If you but knew how you the purpose cherish
	Whiles thus you mock it! how, in stripping it,
	You more invest it! Ebbing men, indeed,
	Most often do so near the bottom run
	By their own fear or sloth.

SEBASTIAN	Prithee, say on:
	The setting of thine eye and cheek proclaim
	A matter from thee, and a birth indeed
	Which throes thee much to yield.

ANTONIO	Thus, sir:
	Although this lord of weak remembrance, this,
	Who shall be of as little memory
	When he is earth'd, hath here almost persuade,--
	For he's a spirit of persuasion, only
	Professes to persuade,--the king his son's alive,
	'Tis as impossible that he's undrown'd
	And he that sleeps here swims.

SEBASTIAN	I have no hope
	That he's undrown'd.

ANTONIO	O, out of that 'no hope'
	What great hope have you! no hope that way is
	Another way so high a hope that even
	Ambition cannot pierce a wink beyond,
	But doubt discovery there. Will you grant with me
	That Ferdinand is drown'd?

SEBASTIAN	He's gone.

ANTONIO	Then, tell me,
	Who's the next heir of Naples?

SEBASTIAN	Claribel.

ANTONIO	She that is queen of Tunis; she that dwells
	Ten leagues beyond man's life; she that from Naples
	Can have no note, unless the sun were post--
	The man i' the moon's too slow--till new-born chins
	Be rough and razorable; she that--from whom?
	We all were sea-swallow'd, though some cast again,
	And by that destiny to perform an act
	Whereof what's past is prologue, what to come
	In yours and my discharge.

SEBASTIAN	What stuff is this! how say you?
	'Tis true, my brother's daughter's queen of Tunis;
	So is she heir of Naples; 'twixt which regions
	There is some space.

ANTONIO	A space whose every cubit
	Seems to cry out, 'How shall that Claribel
	Measure us back to Naples? Keep in Tunis,
	And let Sebastian wake.' Say, this were death
	That now hath seized them; why, they were no worse
	Than now they are. There be that can rule Naples
	As well as he that sleeps; lords that can prate
	As amply and unnecessarily
	As this Gonzalo; I myself could make
	A chough of as deep chat. O, that you bore
	The mind that I do! what a sleep were this
	For your advancement! Do you understand me?

SEBASTIAN	Methinks I do.

ANTONIO	                  And how does your content
	Tender your own good fortune?

SEBASTIAN	I remember
	You did supplant your brother Prospero.

ANTONIO	True:
	And look how well my garments sit upon me;
	Much feater than before: my brother's servants
	Were then my fellows; now they are my men.

SEBASTIAN	But, for your conscience?

ANTONIO	Ay, sir; where lies that? if 'twere a kibe,
	'Twould put me to my slipper: but I feel not
	This deity in my bosom: twenty consciences,
	That stand 'twixt me and Milan, candied be they
	And melt ere they molest! Here lies your brother,
	No better than the earth he lies upon,
	If he were that which now he's like, that's dead;
	Whom I, with this obedient steel, three inches of it,
	Can lay to bed for ever; whiles you, doing thus,
	To the perpetual wink for aye might put
	This ancient morsel, this Sir Prudence, who
	Should not upbraid our course. For all the rest,
	They'll take suggestion as a cat laps milk;
	They'll tell the clock to any business that
	We say befits the hour.

SEBASTIAN	Thy case, dear friend,
	Shall be my precedent; as thou got'st Milan,
	I'll come by Naples. Draw thy sword: one stroke
	Shall free thee from the tribute which thou payest;
	And I the king shall love thee.

ANTONIO	Draw together;
	And when I rear my hand, do you the like,
	To fall it on Gonzalo.

SEBASTIAN	O, but one word.

	[They talk apart]

	[Re-enter ARIEL, invisible]

ARIEL	My master through his art foresees the danger
	That you, his friend, are in; and sends me forth--
	For else his project dies--to keep them living.

	[Sings in GONZALO's ear]

	While you here do snoring lie,
	Open-eyed conspiracy
	His time doth take.
	If of life you keep a care,
	Shake off slumber, and beware:
	Awake, awake!

ANTONIO	Then let us both be sudden.

GONZALO	Now, good angels
	Preserve the king.

	[They wake]

ALONSO	Why, how now? ho, awake! Why are you drawn?
	Wherefore this ghastly looking?

GONZALO	What's the matter?

SEBASTIAN	Whiles we stood here securing your repose,
	Even now, we heard a hollow burst of bellowing
	Like bulls, or rather lions: did't not wake you?
	It struck mine ear most terribly.

ALONSO	I heard nothing.

ANTONIO	O, 'twas a din to fright a monster's ear,
	To make an earthquake! sure, it was the roar
	Of a whole herd of lions.

ALONSO	Heard you this, Gonzalo?

GONZALO	Upon mine honour, sir, I heard a humming,
	And that a strange one too, which did awake me:
	I shaked you, sir, and cried: as mine eyes open'd,
	I saw their weapons drawn: there was a noise,
	That's verily. 'Tis best we stand upon our guard,
	Or that we quit this place; let's draw our weapons.

ALONSO	Lead off this ground; and let's make further search
	For my poor son.

GONZALO	Heavens keep him from these beasts!
	For he is, sure, i' the island.

ALONSO	Lead away.

ARIEL	Prospero my lord shall know what I have done:
	So, king, go safely on to seek thy son.

	[Exeunt]




	THE TEMPEST


ACT II



SCENE II	Another part of the island.


	[Enter CALIBAN with a burden of wood. A noise of
	thunder heard]

CALIBAN	All the infections that the sun sucks up
	From bogs, fens, flats, on Prosper fall and make him
	By inch-meal a disease! His spirits hear me
	And yet I needs must curse. But they'll nor pinch,
	Fright me with urchin--shows, pitch me i' the mire,
	Nor lead me, like a firebrand, in the dark
	Out of my way, unless he bid 'em; but
	For every trifle are they set upon me;
	Sometime like apes that mow and chatter at me
	And after bite me, then like hedgehogs which
	Lie tumbling in my barefoot way and mount
	Their pricks at my footfall; sometime am I
	All wound with adders who with cloven tongues
	Do hiss me into madness.

	[Enter TRINCULO]

		    Lo, now, lo!

	Here comes a spirit of his, and to torment me
	For bringing wood in slowly. I'll fall flat;
	Perchance he will not mind me.

TRINCULO	Here's neither bush nor shrub, to bear off
	any weather at all, and another storm brewing;
	I hear it sing i' the wind: yond same black
	cloud, yond huge one, looks like a foul
	bombard that would shed his liquor. If it
	should thunder as it did before, I know not
	where to hide my head: yond same cloud cannot
	choose but fall by pailfuls. What have we
	here? a man or a fish? dead or alive? A fish:
	he smells like a fish; a very ancient and fish-
	like smell; a kind of not of the newest Poor-
	John. A strange fish! Were I in England now,
	as once I was, and had but this fish painted,
	not a holiday fool there but would give a piece
	of silver: there would this monster make a
	man; any strange beast there makes a man:
	when they will not give a doit to relieve a lame
	beggar, they will lazy out ten to see a dead
	Indian. Legged like a man and his fins like
	arms! Warm o' my troth! I do now let loose
	my opinion; hold it no longer: this is no fish,
	but an islander, that hath lately suffered by a
	thunderbolt.

	[Thunder]

	Alas, the storm is come again! my best way is to
	creep under his gaberdine; there is no other
	shelter hereabouts: misery acquaints a man with
	strange bed-fellows. I will here shroud till the
	dregs of the storm be past.

	[Enter STEPHANO, singing: a bottle in his hand]

STEPHANO	   I shall no more to sea, to sea,
	Here shall I die ashore--

	This is a very scurvy tune to sing at a man's
	funeral: well, here's my comfort. [Drinks]

	[Sings]

	The master, the swabber, the boatswain and I,
	The gunner and his mate
	Loved Mall, Meg and Marian and Margery,
	But none of us cared for Kate;
	For she had a tongue with a tang,
	Would cry to a sailor, Go hang!
	She loved not the savour of tar nor of pitch,
	Yet a tailor might scratch her where'er she did itch:
	Then to sea, boys, and let her go hang!

	This is a scurvy tune too: but here's my comfort.
	[Drinks]

CALIBAN	Do not torment me: Oh!

STEPHANO	What's the matter? Have we devils here? Do you put
	tricks upon's with savages and men of Ind, ha? I
	have not scaped drowning to be afeard now of your
	four legs; for it hath been said, As proper a man as
	ever went on four legs cannot make him give ground;
	and it shall be said so again while Stephano
	breathes at's nostrils.

CALIBAN	The spirit torments me; Oh!

STEPHANO	This is some monster of the isle with four legs, who
	hath got, as I take it, an ague. Where the devil
	should he learn our language? I will give him some
	relief, if it be but for that. if I can recover him
	and keep him tame and get to Naples with him, he's a
	present for any emperor that ever trod on neat's leather.

CALIBAN	Do not torment me, prithee; I'll bring my wood home faster.

STEPHANO	He's in his fit now and does not talk after the
	wisest. He shall taste of my bottle: if he have
	never drunk wine afore will go near to remove his
	fit. If I can recover him and keep him tame, I will
	not take too much for him; he shall pay for him that
	hath him, and that soundly.

CALIBAN	Thou dost me yet but little hurt; thou wilt anon, I
	know it by thy trembling: now Prosper works upon thee.

STEPHANO	Come on your ways; open your mouth; here is that
	which will give language to you, cat: open your
	mouth; this will shake your shaking, I can tell you,
	and that soundly: you cannot tell who's your friend:
	open your chaps again.

TRINCULO	I should know that voice: it should be--but he is
	drowned; and these are devils: O defend me!

STEPHANO	Four legs and two voices: a most delicate monster!
	His forward voice now is to speak well of his
	friend; his backward voice is to utter foul speeches
	and to detract. If all the wine in my bottle will
	recover him, I will help his ague. Come. Amen! I
	will pour some in thy other mouth.

TRINCULO	Stephano!

STEPHANO	Doth thy other mouth call me? Mercy, mercy! This is
	a devil, and no monster: I will leave him; I have no
	long spoon.

TRINCULO	Stephano! If thou beest Stephano, touch me and
	speak to me: for I am Trinculo--be not afeard--thy
	good friend Trinculo.

STEPHANO	If thou beest Trinculo, come forth: I'll pull thee
	by the lesser legs: if any be Trinculo's legs,
	these are they. Thou art very Trinculo indeed! How
	camest thou to be the siege of this moon-calf? can
	he vent Trinculos?

TRINCULO	I took him to be killed with a thunder-stroke. But
	art thou not drowned, Stephano? I hope now thou art
	not drowned. Is the storm overblown? I hid me
	under the dead moon-calf's gaberdine for fear of
	the storm. And art thou living, Stephano? O
	Stephano, two Neapolitans 'scaped!

STEPHANO	Prithee, do not turn me about; my stomach is not constant.

CALIBAN	[Aside]  These be fine things, an if they be
	not sprites.
	That's a brave god and bears celestial liquor.
	I will kneel to him.

STEPHANO	How didst thou 'scape? How camest thou hither?
	swear by this bottle how thou camest hither. I
	escaped upon a butt of sack which the sailors
	heaved o'erboard, by this bottle; which I made of
	the bark of a tree with mine own hands since I was
	cast ashore.

CALIBAN	I'll swear upon that bottle to be thy true subject;
	for the liquor is not earthly.

STEPHANO	Here; swear then how thou escapedst.

TRINCULO	Swum ashore. man, like a duck: I can swim like a
	duck, I'll be sworn.

STEPHANO	Here, kiss the book. Though thou canst swim like a
	duck, thou art made like a goose.

TRINCULO	O Stephano. hast any more of this?

STEPHANO	The whole butt, man: my cellar is in a rock by the
	sea-side where my wine is hid. How now, moon-calf!
	how does thine ague?

CALIBAN	Hast thou not dropp'd from heaven?

STEPHANO	Out o' the moon, I do assure thee: I was the man i'
	the moon when time was.

CALIBAN	I have seen thee in her and I do adore thee:
	My mistress show'd me thee and thy dog and thy bush.

STEPHANO	Come, swear to that; kiss the book: I will furnish
	it anon with new contents swear.

TRINCULO	By this good light, this is a very shallow monster!
	I afeard of him! A very weak monster! The man i'
	the moon! A most poor credulous monster! Well
	drawn, monster, in good sooth!

CALIBAN	I'll show thee every fertile inch o' th' island;
	And I will kiss thy foot: I prithee, be my god.

TRINCULO	By this light, a most perfidious and drunken
	monster! when 's god's asleep, he'll rob his bottle.

CALIBAN	I'll kiss thy foot; I'll swear myself thy subject.

STEPHANO	Come on then; down, and swear.

TRINCULO	I shall laugh myself to death at this puppy-headed
	monster. A most scurvy monster! I could find in my
	heart to beat him,--

STEPHANO	Come, kiss.

TRINCULO	But that the poor monster's in drink: an abominable monster!

CALIBAN	I'll show thee the best springs; I'll pluck thee berries;
	I'll fish for thee and get thee wood enough.
	A plague upon the tyrant that I serve!
	I'll bear him no more sticks, but follow thee,
	Thou wondrous man.

TRINCULO	A most ridiculous monster, to make a wonder of a
	Poor drunkard!

CALIBAN	I prithee, let me bring thee where crabs grow;
	And I with my long nails will dig thee pignuts;
	Show thee a jay's nest and instruct thee how
	To snare the nimble marmoset; I'll bring thee
	To clustering filberts and sometimes I'll get thee
	Young scamels from the rock. Wilt thou go with me?

STEPHANO	I prithee now, lead the way without any more
	talking. Trinculo, the king and all our company
	else being drowned, we will inherit here: here;
	bear my bottle: fellow Trinculo, we'll fill him by
	and by again.

CALIBAN	[Sings drunkenly]
	Farewell master; farewell, farewell!

TRINCULO	A howling monster: a drunken monster!

CALIBAN	   No more dams I'll make for fish
	Nor fetch in firing
	At requiring;
	Nor scrape trencher, nor wash dish
	'Ban, 'Ban, Cacaliban
	Has a new master: get a new man.

	Freedom, hey-day! hey-day, freedom! freedom,
	hey-day, freedom!

STEPHANO	O brave monster! Lead the way.

	[Exeunt]




	THE TEMPEST


ACT III



SCENE I	Before PROSPERO'S Cell.


	[Enter FERDINAND, bearing a log]

FERDINAND	There be some sports are painful, and their labour
	Delight in them sets off: some kinds of baseness
	Are nobly undergone and most poor matters
	Point to rich ends. This my mean task
	Would be as heavy to me as odious, but
	The mistress which I serve quickens what's dead
	And makes my labours pleasures: O, she is
	Ten times more gentle than her father's crabbed,
	And he's composed of harshness. I must remove
	Some thousands of these logs and pile them up,
	Upon a sore injunction: my sweet mistress
	Weeps when she sees me work, and says, such baseness
	Had never like executor. I forget:
	But these sweet thoughts do even refresh my labours,
	Most busy lest, when I do it.

	[Enter MIRANDA; and PROSPERO at a distance, unseen]

MIRANDA	Alas, now, pray you,
	Work not so hard: I would the lightning had
	Burnt up those logs that you are enjoin'd to pile!
	Pray, set it down and rest you: when this burns,
	'Twill weep for having wearied you. My father
	Is hard at study; pray now, rest yourself;
	He's safe for these three hours.

FERDINAND	O most dear mistress,
	The sun will set before I shall discharge
	What I must strive to do.

MIRANDA	If you'll sit down,
	I'll bear your logs the while: pray, give me that;
	I'll carry it to the pile.

FERDINAND	No, precious creature;
	I had rather crack my sinews, break my back,
	Than you should such dishonour undergo,
	While I sit lazy by.

MIRANDA	It would become me
	As well as it does you: and I should do it
	With much more ease; for my good will is to it,
	And yours it is against.

PROSPERO	Poor worm, thou art infected!
	This visitation shows it.

MIRANDA	You look wearily.

FERDINAND	No, noble mistress;'tis fresh morning with me
	When you are by at night. I do beseech you--
	Chiefly that I might set it in my prayers--
	What is your name?

MIRANDA	                  Miranda.--O my father,
	I have broke your hest to say so!

FERDINAND	Admired Miranda!
	Indeed the top of admiration! worth
	What's dearest to the world! Full many a lady
	I have eyed with best regard and many a time
	The harmony of their tongues hath into bondage
	Brought my too diligent ear: for several virtues
	Have I liked several women; never any
	With so fun soul, but some defect in her
	Did quarrel with the noblest grace she owed
	And put it to the foil: but you, O you,
	So perfect and so peerless, are created
	Of every creature's best!

MIRANDA	I do not know
	One of my sex; no woman's face remember,
	Save, from my glass, mine own; nor have I seen
	More that I may call men than you, good friend,
	And my dear father: how features are abroad,
	I am skilless of; but, by my modesty,
	The jewel in my dower, I would not wish
	Any companion in the world but you,
	Nor can imagination form a shape,
	Besides yourself, to like of. But I prattle
	Something too wildly and my father's precepts
	I therein do forget.

FERDINAND	I am in my condition
	A prince, Miranda; I do think, a king;
	I would, not so!--and would no more endure
	This wooden slavery than to suffer
	The flesh-fly blow my mouth. Hear my soul speak:
	The very instant that I saw you, did
	My heart fly to your service; there resides,
	To make me slave to it; and for your sake
	Am I this patient log--man.

MIRANDA	Do you love me?

FERDINAND	O heaven, O earth, bear witness to this sound
	And crown what I profess with kind event
	If I speak true! if hollowly, invert
	What best is boded me to mischief! I
	Beyond all limit of what else i' the world
	Do love, prize, honour you.

MIRANDA	I am a fool
	To weep at what I am glad of.

PROSPERO	Fair encounter
	Of two most rare affections! Heavens rain grace
	On that which breeds between 'em!

FERDINAND	Wherefore weep you?

MIRANDA	At mine unworthiness that dare not offer
	What I desire to give, and much less take
	What I shall die to want. But this is trifling;
	And all the more it seeks to hide itself,
	The bigger bulk it shows. Hence, bashful cunning!
	And prompt me, plain and holy innocence!
	I am your wife, it you will marry me;
	If not, I'll die your maid: to be your fellow
	You may deny me; but I'll be your servant,
	Whether you will or no.

FERDINAND	My mistress, dearest;
	And I thus humble ever.

MIRANDA	My husband, then?

FERDINAND	Ay, with a heart as willing
	As bondage e'er of freedom: here's my hand.

MIRANDA	And mine, with my heart in't; and now farewell
	Till half an hour hence.

FERDINAND	A thousand thousand!

	[Exeunt FERDINAND and MIRANDA severally]

PROSPERO	So glad of this as they I cannot be,
	Who are surprised withal; but my rejoicing
	At nothing can be more. I'll to my book,
	For yet ere supper-time must I perform
	Much business appertaining.

	[Exit]




	THE TEMPEST


ACT III



SCENE II	Another part of the island.


	[Enter CALIBAN, STEPHANO, and TRINCULO]

STEPHANO	Tell not me; when the butt is out, we will drink
	water; not a drop before: therefore bear up, and
	board 'em. Servant-monster, drink to me.

TRINCULO	Servant-monster! the folly of this island! They
	say there's but five upon this isle: we are three
	of them; if th' other two be brained like us, the
	state totters.

STEPHANO	Drink, servant-monster, when I bid thee: thy eyes
	are almost set in thy head.

TRINCULO	Where should they be set else? he were a brave
	monster indeed, if they were set in his tail.

STEPHANO	My man-monster hath drown'd his tongue in sack:
	for my part, the sea cannot drown me; I swam, ere I
	could recover the shore, five and thirty leagues off
	and on. By this light, thou shalt be my lieutenant,
	monster, or my standard.

TRINCULO	Your lieutenant, if you list; he's no standard.

STEPHANO	We'll not run, Monsieur Monster.

TRINCULO	Nor go neither; but you'll lie like dogs and yet say
	nothing neither.

STEPHANO	Moon-calf, speak once in thy life, if thou beest a
	good moon-calf.

CALIBAN	How does thy honour? Let me lick thy shoe.
	I'll not serve him; he's not valiant.

TRINCULO	Thou liest, most ignorant monster: I am in case to
	justle a constable. Why, thou deboshed fish thou,
	was there ever man a coward that hath drunk so much
	sack as I to-day? Wilt thou tell a monstrous lie,
	being but half a fish and half a monster?

CALIBAN	Lo, how he mocks me! wilt thou let him, my lord?

TRINCULO	'Lord' quoth he! That a monster should be such a natural!

CALIBAN	Lo, lo, again! bite him to death, I prithee.

STEPHANO	Trinculo, keep a good tongue in your head: if you
	prove a mutineer,--the next tree! The poor monster's
	my subject and he shall not suffer indignity.

CALIBAN	I thank my noble lord. Wilt thou be pleased to
	hearken once again to the suit I made to thee?

STEPHANO	Marry, will I	kneel and repeat it; I will stand,
	and so shall Trinculo.

	[Enter ARIEL, invisible]

CALIBAN	As I told thee before, I am subject to a tyrant, a
	sorcerer, that by his cunning hath cheated me of the island.

ARIEL	Thou liest.

CALIBAN	Thou liest, thou jesting monkey, thou: I would my
	valiant master would destroy thee! I do not lie.

STEPHANO	Trinculo, if you trouble him any more in's tale, by
	this hand, I will supplant some of your teeth.

TRINCULO	Why, I said nothing.

STEPHANO	Mum, then, and no more. Proceed.

CALIBAN	I say, by sorcery he got this isle;
	From me he got it. if thy greatness will
	Revenge it on him,--for I know thou darest,
	But this thing dare not,--

STEPHANO	That's most certain.

CALIBAN	Thou shalt be lord of it and I'll serve thee.

STEPHANO	How now shall this be compassed?
	Canst thou bring me to the party?

CALIBAN	Yea, yea, my lord: I'll yield him thee asleep,
	Where thou mayst knock a nail into his bead.

ARIEL	Thou liest; thou canst not.

CALIBAN	What a pied ninny's this! Thou scurvy patch!
	I do beseech thy greatness, give him blows
	And take his bottle from him: when that's gone
	He shall drink nought but brine; for I'll not show him
	Where the quick freshes are.

STEPHANO	Trinculo, run into no further danger:
	interrupt the monster one word further, and,
	by this hand, I'll turn my mercy out o' doors
	and make a stock-fish of thee.

TRINCULO	Why, what did I? I did nothing. I'll go farther
	off.

STEPHANO	Didst thou not say he lied?

ARIEL	Thou liest.

STEPHANO	Do I so? take thou that.

	[Beats TRINCULO]

	As you like this, give me the lie another time.

TRINCULO	I did not give the lie. Out o' your
	wits and bearing too? A pox o' your bottle!
	this can sack and drinking do. A murrain on
	your monster, and the devil take your fingers!

CALIBAN	Ha, ha, ha!

STEPHANO	Now, forward with your tale. Prithee, stand farther
	off.

CALIBAN	Beat him enough: after a little time
	I'll beat him too.

STEPHANO	                  Stand farther. Come, proceed.

CALIBAN	Why, as I told thee, 'tis a custom with him,
	I' th' afternoon to sleep: there thou mayst brain him,
	Having first seized his books, or with a log
	Batter his skull, or paunch him with a stake,
	Or cut his wezand with thy knife. Remember
	First to possess his books; for without them
	He's but a sot, as I am, nor hath not
	One spirit to command: they all do hate him
	As rootedly as I. Burn but his books.
	He has brave utensils,--for so he calls them--
	Which when he has a house, he'll deck withal
	And that most deeply to consider is
	The beauty of his daughter; he himself
	Calls her a nonpareil: I never saw a woman,
	But only Sycorax my dam and she;
	But she as far surpasseth Sycorax
	As great'st does least.

STEPHANO	Is it so brave a lass?

CALIBAN	Ay, lord; she will become thy bed, I warrant.
	And bring thee forth brave brood.

STEPHANO	Monster, I will kill this man: his daughter and I
	will be king and queen--save our graces!--and
	Trinculo and thyself shall be viceroys. Dost thou
	like the plot, Trinculo?

TRINCULO	Excellent.

STEPHANO	Give me thy hand: I am sorry I beat thee; but,
	while thou livest, keep a good tongue in thy head.

CALIBAN	Within this half hour will he be asleep:
	Wilt thou destroy him then?

STEPHANO	Ay, on mine honour.

ARIEL	This will I tell my master.

CALIBAN	Thou makest me merry; I am full of pleasure:
	Let us be jocund: will you troll the catch
	You taught me but while-ere?

STEPHANO	At thy request, monster, I will do reason, any
	reason. Come on, Trinculo, let us sing.

	[Sings]

	Flout 'em and scout 'em
	And scout 'em and flout 'em
	Thought is free.

CALIBAN	That's not the tune.

	[Ariel plays the tune on a tabour and pipe]

STEPHANO	What is this same?

TRINCULO	This is the tune of our catch, played by the picture
	of Nobody.

STEPHANO	If thou beest a man, show thyself in thy likeness:
	if thou beest a devil, take't as thou list.

TRINCULO	O, forgive me my sins!

STEPHANO	He that dies pays all debts: I defy thee. Mercy upon us!

CALIBAN	Art thou afeard?

STEPHANO	No, monster, not I.

CALIBAN	Be not afeard; the isle is full of noises,
	Sounds and sweet airs, that give delight and hurt not.
	Sometimes a thousand twangling instruments
	Will hum about mine ears, and sometime voices
	That, if I then had waked after long sleep,
	Will make me sleep again: and then, in dreaming,
	The clouds methought would open and show riches
	Ready to drop upon me that, when I waked,
	I cried to dream again.

STEPHANO	This will prove a brave kingdom to me, where I shall
	have my music for nothing.

CALIBAN	When Prospero is destroyed.

STEPHANO	That shall be by and by: I remember the story.

TRINCULO	The sound is going away; let's follow it, and
	after do our work.

STEPHANO	Lead, monster; we'll follow. I would I could see
	this tabourer; he lays it on.

TRINCULO	Wilt come? I'll follow, Stephano.

	[Exeunt]




	THE TEMPEST


ACT III



SCENE III	Another part of the island.


	[Enter ALONSO, SEBASTIAN, ANTONIO, GONZALO,
	ADRIAN, FRANCISCO, and others]

GONZALO	By'r lakin, I can go no further, sir;
	My old bones ache: here's a maze trod indeed
	Through forth-rights and meanders! By your patience,
	I needs must rest me.

ALONSO	Old lord, I cannot blame thee,
	Who am myself attach'd with weariness,
	To the dulling of my spirits: sit down, and rest.
	Even here I will put off my hope and keep it
	No longer for my flatterer: he is drown'd
	Whom thus we stray to find, and the sea mocks
	Our frustrate search on land. Well, let him go.

ANTONIO	[Aside to SEBASTIAN]  I am right glad that he's so
	out of hope.
	Do not, for one repulse, forego the purpose
	That you resolved to effect.

SEBASTIAN	[Aside to ANTONIO]  The next advantage
	Will we take throughly.

ANTONIO	[Aside to SEBASTIAN]  Let it be to-night;
	For, now they are oppress'd with travel, they
	Will not, nor cannot, use such vigilance
	As when they are fresh.

SEBASTIAN	[Aside to ANTONIO]  I say, to-night: no more.

	[Solemn and strange music]

ALONSO	What harmony is this? My good friends, hark!

GONZALO	Marvellous sweet music!

	[Enter PROSPERO above, invisible. Enter several
	strange Shapes, bringing in a banquet;
	they dance about it with gentle actions of
	salutation; and, inviting the King, &c. to
	eat, they depart]

ALONSO	Give us kind keepers, heavens! What were these?

SEBASTIAN	A living drollery. Now I will believe
	That there are unicorns, that in Arabia
	There is one tree, the phoenix' throne, one phoenix
	At this hour reigning there.

ANTONIO	I'll believe both;
	And what does else want credit, come to me,
	And I'll be sworn 'tis true: travellers ne'er did
	lie,
	Though fools at home condemn 'em.

GONZALO	If in Naples
	I should report this now, would they believe me?
	If I should say, I saw such islanders--
	For, certes, these are people of the island--
	Who, though they are of monstrous shape, yet, note,
	Their manners are more gentle-kind than of
	Our human generation you shall find
	Many, nay, almost any.

PROSPERO	[Aside]              Honest lord,
	Thou hast said well; for some of you there present
	Are worse than devils.

ALONSO	I cannot too much muse
	Such shapes, such gesture and such sound, expressing,
	Although they want the use of tongue, a kind
	Of excellent dumb discourse.

PROSPERO	[Aside]	Praise in departing.

FRANCISCO	They vanish'd strangely.

SEBASTIAN	No matter, since
	They have left their viands behind; for we have stomachs.
	Will't please you taste of what is here?

ALONSO	Not I.

GONZALO	Faith, sir, you need not fear. When we were boys,
	Who would believe that there were mountaineers
	Dew-lapp'd like bulls, whose throats had hanging at 'em
	Wallets of flesh? or that there were such men
	Whose heads stood in their breasts? which now we find
	Each putter-out of five for one will bring us
	Good warrant of.

ALONSO	                  I will stand to and feed,
	Although my last: no matter, since I feel
	The best is past. Brother, my lord the duke,
	Stand to and do as we.

	[Thunder and lightning. Enter ARIEL, like a
	harpy; claps his wings upon the table; and,
	with a quaint device, the banquet vanishes]

ARIEL	You are three men of sin, whom Destiny,
	That hath to instrument this lower world
	And what is in't, the never-surfeited sea
	Hath caused to belch up you; and on this island
	Where man doth not inhabit; you 'mongst men
	Being most unfit to live. I have made you mad;
	And even with such-like valour men hang and drown
	Their proper selves.

	[ALONSO, SEBASTIAN &c. draw their swords]

		You fools! I and my fellows
	Are ministers of Fate: the elements,
	Of whom your swords are temper'd, may as well
	Wound the loud winds, or with bemock'd-at stabs
	Kill the still-closing waters, as diminish
	One dowle that's in my plume: my fellow-ministers
	Are like invulnerable. If you could hurt,
	Your swords are now too massy for your strengths
	And will not be uplifted. But remember--
	For that's my business to you--that you three
	From Milan did supplant good Prospero;
	Exposed unto the sea, which hath requit it,
	Him and his innocent child: for which foul deed
	The powers, delaying, not forgetting, have
	Incensed the seas and shores, yea, all the creatures,
	Against your peace. Thee of thy son, Alonso,
	They have bereft; and do pronounce by me:
	Lingering perdition, worse than any death
	Can be at once, shall step by step attend
	You and your ways; whose wraths to guard you from--
	Which here, in this most desolate isle, else falls
	Upon your heads--is nothing but heart-sorrow
	And a clear life ensuing.

	[He vanishes in thunder; then, to soft music
	enter the Shapes again, and dance, with
	mocks and mows, and carrying out the table]

PROSPERO	Bravely the figure of this harpy hast thou
	Perform'd, my Ariel; a grace it had, devouring:
	Of my instruction hast thou nothing bated
	In what thou hadst to say: so, with good life
	And observation strange, my meaner ministers
	Their several kinds have done. My high charms work
	And these mine enemies are all knit up
	In their distractions; they now are in my power;
	And in these fits I leave them, while I visit
	Young Ferdinand, whom they suppose is drown'd,
	And his and mine loved darling.

	[Exit above]

GONZALO	I' the name of something holy, sir, why stand you
	In this strange stare?

ALONSO	O, it is monstrous, monstrous:
	Methought the billows spoke and told me of it;
	The winds did sing it to me, and the thunder,
	That deep and dreadful organ-pipe, pronounced
	The name of Prosper: it did bass my trespass.
	Therefore my son i' the ooze is bedded, and
	I'll seek him deeper than e'er plummet sounded
	And with him there lie mudded.
	[Exit]

SEBASTIAN	But one fiend at a time,
	I'll fight their legions o'er.

ANTONIO	I'll be thy second.

	[Exeunt SEBASTIAN, and ANTONIO]

GONZALO	All three of them are desperate: their great guilt,
	Like poison given to work a great time after,
	Now 'gins to bite the spirits. I do beseech you
	That are of suppler joints, follow them swiftly
	And hinder them from what this ecstasy
	May now provoke them to.

ADRIAN	Follow, I pray you.

	[Exeunt]




	THE TEMPEST


ACT IV



SCENE I	Before PROSPERO'S cell.


	[Enter PROSPERO, FERDINAND, and MIRANDA]

PROSPERO	If I have too austerely punish'd you,
	Your compensation makes amends, for I
	Have given you here a third of mine own life,
	Or that for which I live; who once again
	I tender to thy hand: all thy vexations
	Were but my trials of thy love and thou
	Hast strangely stood the test here, afore Heaven,
	I ratify this my rich gift. O Ferdinand,
	Do not smile at me that I boast her off,
	For thou shalt find she will outstrip all praise
	And make it halt behind her.

FERDINAND	I do believe it
	Against an oracle.

PROSPERO	Then, as my gift and thine own acquisition
	Worthily purchased take my daughter: but
	If thou dost break her virgin-knot before
	All sanctimonious ceremonies may
	With full and holy rite be minister'd,
	No sweet aspersion shall the heavens let fall
	To make this contract grow: but barren hate,
	Sour-eyed disdain and discord shall bestrew
	The union of your bed with weeds so loathly
	That you shall hate it both: therefore take heed,
	As Hymen's lamps shall light you.

FERDINAND	As I hope
	For quiet days, fair issue and long life,
	With such love as 'tis now, the murkiest den,
	The most opportune place, the strong'st suggestion.
	Our worser genius can, shall never melt
	Mine honour into lust, to take away
	The edge of that day's celebration
	When I shall think: or Phoebus' steeds are founder'd,
	Or Night kept chain'd below.

PROSPERO	Fairly spoke.
	Sit then and talk with her; she is thine own.
	What, Ariel! my industrious servant, Ariel!

	[Enter ARIEL]

ARIEL	What would my potent master? here I am.

PROSPERO	Thou and thy meaner fellows your last service
	Did worthily perform; and I must use you
	In such another trick. Go bring the rabble,
	O'er whom I give thee power, here to this place:
	Incite them to quick motion; for I must
	Bestow upon the eyes of this young couple
	Some vanity of mine art: it is my promise,
	And they expect it from me.

ARIEL	Presently?

PROSPERO	Ay, with a twink.

ARIEL	   Before you can say 'come' and 'go,'
	And breathe twice and cry 'so, so,'
	Each one, tripping on his toe,
	Will be here with mop and mow.
	Do you love me, master? no?

PROSPERO	Dearly my delicate Ariel. Do not approach
	Till thou dost hear me call.

ARIEL	Well, I conceive.

	[Exit]

PROSPERO	Look thou be true; do not give dalliance
	Too much the rein: the strongest oaths are straw
	To the fire i' the blood: be more abstemious,
	Or else, good night your vow!

FERDINAND	I warrant you sir;
	The white cold virgin snow upon my heart
	Abates the ardour of my liver.

PROSPERO	Well.
	Now come, my Ariel! bring a corollary,
	Rather than want a spirit: appear and pertly!
	No tongue! all eyes! be silent.

	[Soft music]

	[Enter IRIS]

IRIS	Ceres, most bounteous lady, thy rich leas
	Of wheat, rye, barley, vetches, oats and pease;
	Thy turfy mountains, where live nibbling sheep,
	And flat meads thatch'd with stover, them to keep;
	Thy banks with pioned and twilled brims,
	Which spongy April at thy hest betrims,
	To make cold nymphs chaste crowns; and thy broom -groves,
	Whose shadow the dismissed bachelor loves,
	Being lass-lorn: thy pole-clipt vineyard;
	And thy sea-marge, sterile and rocky-hard,
	Where thou thyself dost air;--the queen o' the sky,
	Whose watery arch and messenger am I,
	Bids thee leave these, and with her sovereign grace,
	Here on this grass-plot, in this very place,
	To come and sport: her peacocks fly amain:
	Approach, rich Ceres, her to entertain.

	[Enter CERES]

CERES	Hail, many-colour'd messenger, that ne'er
	Dost disobey the wife of Jupiter;
	Who with thy saffron wings upon my flowers
	Diffusest honey-drops, refreshing showers,
	And with each end of thy blue bow dost crown
	My bosky acres and my unshrubb'd down,
	Rich scarf to my proud earth; why hath thy queen
	Summon'd me hither, to this short-grass'd green?

IRIS	A contract of true love to celebrate;
	And some donation freely to estate
	On the blest lovers.

CERES	Tell me, heavenly bow,
	If Venus or her son, as thou dost know,
	Do now attend the queen? Since they did plot
	The means that dusky Dis my daughter got,
	Her and her blind boy's scandal'd company
	I have forsworn.

IRIS	                  Of her society
	Be not afraid: I met her deity
	Cutting the clouds towards Paphos and her son
	Dove-drawn with her. Here thought they to have done
	Some wanton charm upon this man and maid,
	Whose vows are, that no bed-right shall be paid
	Till Hymen's torch be lighted: but vain;
	Mars's hot minion is returned again;
	Her waspish-headed son has broke his arrows,
	Swears he will shoot no more but play with sparrows
	And be a boy right out.

CERES	High'st queen of state,
	Great Juno, comes; I know her by her gait.

	[Enter JUNO]

JUNO	How does my bounteous sister? Go with me
	To bless this twain, that they may prosperous be
	And honour'd in their issue.

	[They sing:]

JUNO	   Honour, riches, marriage-blessing,
	Long continuance, and increasing,
	Hourly joys be still upon you!
	Juno sings her blessings upon you.

CERES	   Earth's increase, foison plenty,
	Barns and garners never empty,
	Vines and clustering bunches growing,
	Plants with goodly burthen bowing;
	Spring come to you at the farthest
	In the very end of harvest!
	Scarcity and want shall shun you;
	Ceres' blessing so is on you.

FERDINAND	This is a most majestic vision, and
	Harmoniously charmingly. May I be bold
	To think these spirits?

PROSPERO	Spirits, which by mine art
	I have from their confines call'd to enact
	My present fancies.

FERDINAND	Let me live here ever;
	So rare a wonder'd father and a wife
	Makes this place Paradise.

	[Juno and Ceres whisper, and send Iris on
	employment]

PROSPERO	Sweet, now, silence!
	Juno and Ceres whisper seriously;
	There's something else to do: hush, and be mute,
	Or else our spell is marr'd.

IRIS	You nymphs, call'd Naiads, of the windring brooks,
	With your sedged crowns and ever-harmless looks,
	Leave your crisp channels and on this green land
	Answer your summons; Juno does command:
	Come, temperate nymphs, and help to celebrate
	A contract of true love; be not too late.

	[Enter certain Nymphs]

	You sunburnt sicklemen, of August weary,
	Come hither from the furrow and be merry:
	Make holiday; your rye-straw hats put on
	And these fresh nymphs encounter every one
	In country footing.

	[Enter certain Reapers, properly habited: they
	join with the Nymphs in a graceful dance;
	towards the end whereof PROSPERO starts
	suddenly, and speaks; after which, to a
	strange, hollow, and confused noise, they
	heavily vanish]

PROSPERO	[Aside]  I had forgot that foul conspiracy
	Of the beast Caliban and his confederates
	Against my life: the minute of their plot
	Is almost come.

	[To the Spirits]

	Well done! avoid; no more!

FERDINAND	This is strange: your father's in some passion
	That works him strongly.

MIRANDA	Never till this day
	Saw I him touch'd with anger so distemper'd.

PROSPERO	You do look, my son, in a moved sort,
	As if you were dismay'd: be cheerful, sir.
	Our revels now are ended. These our actors,
	As I foretold you, were all spirits and
	Are melted into air, into thin air:
	And, like the baseless fabric of this vision,
	The cloud-capp'd towers, the gorgeous palaces,
	The solemn temples, the great globe itself,
	Ye all which it inherit, shall dissolve
	And, like this insubstantial pageant faded,
	Leave not a rack behind. We are such stuff
	As dreams are made on, and our little life
	Is rounded with a sleep. Sir, I am vex'd;
	Bear with my weakness; my, brain is troubled:
	Be not disturb'd with my infirmity:
	If you be pleased, retire into my cell
	And there repose: a turn or two I'll walk,
	To still my beating mind.


FERDINAND	|
	|  We wish your peace.
MIRANDA	|


	[Exeunt]

PROSPERO	Come with a thought I thank thee, Ariel: come.

	[Enter ARIEL]

ARIEL	Thy thoughts I cleave to. What's thy pleasure?

PROSPERO	Spirit,
	We must prepare to meet with Caliban.

ARIEL	Ay, my commander: when I presented Ceres,
	I thought to have told thee of it, but I fear'd
	Lest I might anger thee.

PROSPERO	Say again, where didst thou leave these varlets?

ARIEL	I told you, sir, they were red-hot with drinking;
	So fun of valour that they smote the air
	For breathing in their faces; beat the ground
	For kissing of their feet; yet always bending
	Towards their project. Then I beat my tabour;
	At which, like unback'd colts, they prick'd
	their ears,
	Advanced their eyelids, lifted up their noses
	As they smelt music: so I charm'd their ears
	That calf-like they my lowing follow'd through
	Tooth'd briers, sharp furzes, pricking goss and thorns,
	Which entered their frail shins: at last I left them
	I' the filthy-mantled pool beyond your cell,
	There dancing up to the chins, that the foul lake
	O'erstunk their feet.

PROSPERO	This was well done, my bird.
	Thy shape invisible retain thou still:
	The trumpery in my house, go bring it hither,
	For stale to catch these thieves.

ARIEL	I go, I go.

	[Exit]

PROSPERO	A devil, a born devil, on whose nature
	Nurture can never stick; on whom my pains,
	Humanely taken, all, all lost, quite lost;
	And as with age his body uglier grows,
	So his mind cankers. I will plague them all,
	Even to roaring.

	[Re-enter ARIEL, loaden with glistering apparel, &c]

	Come, hang them on this line.

	[PROSPERO and ARIEL remain invisible. Enter
	CALIBAN, STEPHANO, and TRINCULO, all wet]

CALIBAN	Pray you, tread softly, that the blind mole may not
	Hear a foot fall: we now are near his cell.

STEPHANO	Monster, your fairy, which you say is
	a harmless fairy, has done little better than
	played the Jack with us.

TRINCULO	Monster, I do smell all horse-piss; at
	which my nose is in great indignation.

STEPHANO	So is mine. Do you hear, monster? If I should take
	a displeasure against you, look you,--

TRINCULO	Thou wert but a lost monster.

CALIBAN	Good my lord, give me thy favour still.
	Be patient, for the prize I'll bring thee to
	Shall hoodwink this mischance: therefore speak softly.
	All's hush'd as midnight yet.

TRINCULO	Ay, but to lose our bottles in the pool,--

STEPHANO	There is not only disgrace and dishonour in that,
	monster, but an infinite loss.

TRINCULO	That's more to me than my wetting: yet this is your
	harmless fairy, monster.

STEPHANO	I will fetch off my bottle, though I be o'er ears
	for my labour.

CALIBAN	Prithee, my king, be quiet. Seest thou here,
	This is the mouth o' the cell: no noise, and enter.
	Do that good mischief which may make this island
	Thine own for ever, and I, thy Caliban,
	For aye thy foot-licker.

STEPHANO	Give me thy hand. I do begin to have bloody thoughts.

TRINCULO	O king Stephano! O peer! O worthy Stephano! look
	what a wardrobe here is for thee!

CALIBAN	Let it alone, thou fool; it is but trash.

TRINCULO	O, ho, monster! we know what belongs to a frippery.
	O king Stephano!

STEPHANO	Put off that gown, Trinculo; by this hand, I'll have
	that gown.

TRINCULO	Thy grace shall have it.

CALIBAN	The dropsy drown this fool I what do you mean
	To dote thus on such luggage? Let's alone
	And do the murder first: if he awake,
	From toe to crown he'll fill our skins with pinches,
	Make us strange stuff.

STEPHANO	Be you quiet, monster. Mistress line,
	is not this my jerkin? Now is the jerkin under
	the line: now, jerkin, you are like to lose your
	hair and prove a bald jerkin.

TRINCULO	Do, do: we steal by line and level, an't like your grace.

STEPHANO	I thank thee for that jest; here's a garment for't:
	wit shall not go unrewarded while I am king of this
	country. 'Steal by line and level' is an excellent
	pass of pate; there's another garment for't.

TRINCULO	Monster, come, put some lime upon your fingers, and
	away with the rest.

CALIBAN	I will have none on't: we shall lose our time,
	And all be turn'd to barnacles, or to apes
	With foreheads villanous low.

STEPHANO	Monster, lay-to your fingers: help to bear this
	away where my hogshead of wine is, or I'll turn you
	out of my kingdom: go to, carry this.

TRINCULO	And this.

STEPHANO	Ay, and this.

	[A noise of hunters heard. Enter divers Spirits,
	in shape of dogs and hounds, and hunt them about,
	PROSPERO and ARIEL setting them on]

PROSPERO	Hey, Mountain, hey!

ARIEL	Silver I there it goes, Silver!

PROSPERO	Fury, Fury! there, Tyrant, there! hark! hark!

	[CALIBAN, STEPHANO, and TRINCULO, are
	driven out]

	Go charge my goblins that they grind their joints
	With dry convulsions, shorten up their sinews
	With aged cramps, and more pinch-spotted make them
	Than pard or cat o' mountain.

ARIEL	Hark, they roar!

PROSPERO	Let them be hunted soundly. At this hour
	Lie at my mercy all mine enemies:
	Shortly shall all my labours end, and thou
	Shalt have the air at freedom: for a little
	Follow, and do me service.

	[Exeunt]




	THE TEMPEST


ACT V



SCENE I	Before PROSPERO'S cell.


	[Enter PROSPERO in his magic robes, and ARIEL]

PROSPERO	Now does my project gather to a head:
	My charms crack not; my spirits obey; and time
	Goes upright with his carriage. How's the day?

ARIEL	On the sixth hour; at which time, my lord,
	You said our work should cease.

PROSPERO	I did say so,
	When first I raised the tempest. Say, my spirit,
	How fares the king and's followers?

ARIEL	Confined together
	In the same fashion as you gave in charge,
	Just as you left them; all prisoners, sir,
	In the line-grove which weather-fends your cell;
	They cannot budge till your release. The king,
	His brother and yours, abide all three distracted
	And the remainder mourning over them,
	Brimful of sorrow and dismay; but chiefly
	Him that you term'd, sir, 'The good old lord Gonzalo;'
	His tears run down his beard, like winter's drops
	From eaves of reeds. Your charm so strongly works 'em
	That if you now beheld them, your affections
	Would become tender.

PROSPERO	Dost thou think so, spirit?

ARIEL	Mine would, sir, were I human.

PROSPERO	And mine shall.
	Hast thou, which art but air, a touch, a feeling
	Of their afflictions, and shall not myself,
	One of their kind, that relish all as sharply,
	Passion as they, be kindlier moved than thou art?
	Though with their high wrongs I am struck to the quick,
	Yet with my nobler reason 'gaitist my fury
	Do I take part: the rarer action is
	In virtue than in vengeance: they being penitent,
	The sole drift of my purpose doth extend
	Not a frown further. Go release them, Ariel:
	My charms I'll break, their senses I'll restore,
	And they shall be themselves.

ARIEL	I'll fetch them, sir.

	[Exit]

PROSPERO	Ye elves of hills, brooks, standing lakes and groves,
	And ye that on the sands with printless foot
	Do chase the ebbing Neptune and do fly him
	When he comes back; you demi-puppets that
	By moonshine do the green sour ringlets make,
	Whereof the ewe not bites, and you whose pastime
	Is to make midnight mushrooms, that rejoice
	To hear the solemn curfew; by whose aid,
	Weak masters though ye be, I have bedimm'd
	The noontide sun, call'd forth the mutinous winds,
	And 'twixt the green sea and the azured vault
	Set roaring war: to the dread rattling thunder
	Have I given fire and rifted Jove's stout oak
	With his own bolt; the strong-based promontory
	Have I made shake and by the spurs pluck'd up
	The pine and cedar: graves at my command
	Have waked their sleepers, oped, and let 'em forth
	By my so potent art. But this rough magic
	I here abjure, and, when I have required
	Some heavenly music, which even now I do,
	To work mine end upon their senses that
	This airy charm is for, I'll break my staff,
	Bury it certain fathoms in the earth,
	And deeper than did ever plummet sound
	I'll drown my book.

	[Solemn music]

	[Re-enter ARIEL before: then ALONSO, with a
	frantic gesture, attended by GONZALO;
	SEBASTIAN and ANTONIO in like manner,
	attended by ADRIAN and FRANCISCO   they all
	enter the circle which PROSPERO had made,
	and there stand charmed; which PROSPERO
	observing, speaks:]

	A solemn air and the best comforter
	To an unsettled fancy cure thy brains,
	Now useless, boil'd within thy skull! There stand,
	For you are spell-stopp'd.
	Holy Gonzalo, honourable man,
	Mine eyes, even sociable to the show of thine,
	Fall fellowly drops. The charm dissolves apace,
	And as the morning steals upon the night,
	Melting the darkness, so their rising senses
	Begin to chase the ignorant fumes that mantle
	Their clearer reason. O good Gonzalo,
	My true preserver, and a loyal sir
	To him you follow'st! I will pay thy graces
	Home both in word and deed. Most cruelly
	Didst thou, Alonso, use me and my daughter:
	Thy brother was a furtherer in the act.
	Thou art pinch'd fort now, Sebastian. Flesh and blood,
	You, brother mine, that entertain'd ambition,
	Expell'd remorse and nature; who, with Sebastian,
	Whose inward pinches therefore are most strong,
	Would here have kill'd your king; I do forgive thee,
	Unnatural though thou art. Their understanding
	Begins to swell, and the approaching tide
	Will shortly fill the reasonable shore
	That now lies foul and muddy. Not one of them
	That yet looks on me, or would know me Ariel,
	Fetch me the hat and rapier in my cell:
	I will discase me, and myself present
	As I was sometime Milan: quickly, spirit;
	Thou shalt ere long be free.

	[ARIEL sings and helps to attire him]

	Where the bee sucks. there suck I:
	In a cowslip's bell I lie;
	There I couch when owls do cry.
	On the bat's back I do fly
	After summer merrily.
	Merrily, merrily shall I live now
	Under the blossom that hangs on the bough.

PROSPERO	Why, that's my dainty Ariel! I shall miss thee:
	But yet thou shalt have freedom: so, so, so.
	To the king's ship, invisible as thou art:
	There shalt thou find the mariners asleep
	Under the hatches; the master and the boatswain
	Being awake, enforce them to this place,
	And presently, I prithee.

ARIEL	I drink the air before me, and return
	Or ere your pulse twice beat.

	[Exit]

GONZALO	All torment, trouble, wonder and amazement
	Inhabits here: some heavenly power guide us
	Out of this fearful country!

PROSPERO	Behold, sir king,
	The wronged Duke of Milan, Prospero:
	For more assurance that a living prince
	Does now speak to thee, I embrace thy body;
	And to thee and thy company I bid
	A hearty welcome.

ALONSO	                  Whether thou best he or no,
	Or some enchanted trifle to abuse me,
	As late I have been, I not know: thy pulse
	Beats as of flesh and blood; and, since I saw thee,
	The affliction of my mind amends, with which,
	I fear, a madness held me: this must crave,
	An if this be at all, a most strange story.
	Thy dukedom I resign and do entreat
	Thou pardon me my wrongs. But how should Prospero
	Be living and be here?

PROSPERO	First, noble friend,
	Let me embrace thine age, whose honour cannot
	Be measured or confined.

GONZALO	Whether this be
	Or be not, I'll not swear.

PROSPERO	You do yet taste
	Some subtilties o' the isle, that will not let you
	Believe things certain. Welcome, my friends all!

	[Aside to SEBASTIAN and ANTONIO]

	But you, my brace of lords, were I so minded,
	I here could pluck his highness' frown upon you
	And justify you traitors: at this time
	I will tell no tales.

SEBASTIAN	[Aside]  The devil speaks in him.

PROSPERO	No.
	For you, most wicked sir, whom to call brother
	Would even infect my mouth, I do forgive
	Thy rankest fault; all of them; and require
	My dukedom of thee, which perforce, I know,
	Thou must restore.

ALONSO	                  If thou be'st Prospero,
	Give us particulars of thy preservation;
	How thou hast met us here, who three hours since
	Were wreck'd upon this shore; where I have lost--
	How sharp the point of this remembrance is!--
	My dear son Ferdinand.

PROSPERO	I am woe for't, sir.

ALONSO	Irreparable is the loss, and patience
	Says it is past her cure.

PROSPERO	I rather think
	You have not sought her help, of whose soft grace
	For the like loss I have her sovereign aid
	And rest myself content.

ALONSO	You the like loss!

PROSPERO	As great to me as late; and, supportable
	To make the dear loss, have I means much weaker
	Than you may call to comfort you, for I
	Have lost my daughter.

ALONSO	A daughter?
	O heavens, that they were living both in Naples,
	The king and queen there! that they were, I wish
	Myself were mudded in that oozy bed
	Where my son lies. When did you lose your daughter?

PROSPERO	In this last tempest. I perceive these lords
	At this encounter do so much admire
	That they devour their reason and scarce think
	Their eyes do offices of truth, their words
	Are natural breath: but, howsoe'er you have
	Been justled from your senses, know for certain
	That I am Prospero and that very duke
	Which was thrust forth of Milan, who most strangely
	Upon this shore, where you were wreck'd, was landed,
	To be the lord on't. No more yet of this;
	For 'tis a chronicle of day by day,
	Not a relation for a breakfast nor
	Befitting this first meeting. Welcome, sir;
	This cell's my court: here have I few attendants
	And subjects none abroad: pray you, look in.
	My dukedom since you have given me again,
	I will requite you with as good a thing;
	At least bring forth a wonder, to content ye
	As much as me my dukedom.

	[Here PROSPERO discovers FERDINAND and MIRANDA
	playing at chess]

MIRANDA	Sweet lord, you play me false.

FERDINAND	No, my dear'st love,
	I would not for the world.

MIRANDA	Yes, for a score of kingdoms you should wrangle,
	And I would call it, fair play.

ALONSO	If this prove
	A vision of the Island, one dear son
	Shall I twice lose.

SEBASTIAN	A most high miracle!

FERDINAND	Though the seas threaten, they are merciful;
	I have cursed them without cause.

	[Kneels]

ALONSO	Now all the blessings
	Of a glad father compass thee about!
	Arise, and say how thou camest here.

MIRANDA	O, wonder!
	How many goodly creatures are there here!
	How beauteous mankind is! O brave new world,
	That has such people in't!

PROSPERO	'Tis new to thee.

ALONSO	What is this maid with whom thou wast at play?
	Your eld'st acquaintance cannot be three hours:
	Is she the goddess that hath sever'd us,
	And brought us thus together?

FERDINAND	Sir, she is mortal;
	But by immortal Providence she's mine:
	I chose her when I could not ask my father
	For his advice, nor thought I had one. She
	Is daughter to this famous Duke of Milan,
	Of whom so often I have heard renown,
	But never saw before; of whom I have
	Received a second life; and second father
	This lady makes him to me.

ALONSO	I am hers:
	But, O, how oddly will it sound that I
	Must ask my child forgiveness!

PROSPERO	There, sir, stop:
	Let us not burthen our remembrance with
	A heaviness that's gone.

GONZALO	I have inly wept,
	Or should have spoke ere this. Look down, you god,
	And on this couple drop a blessed crown!
	For it is you that have chalk'd forth the way
	Which brought us hither.

ALONSO	I say, Amen, Gonzalo!

GONZALO	Was Milan thrust from Milan, that his issue
	Should become kings of Naples? O, rejoice
	Beyond a common joy, and set it down
	With gold on lasting pillars: In one voyage
	Did Claribel her husband find at Tunis,
	And Ferdinand, her brother, found a wife
	Where he himself was lost, Prospero his dukedom
	In a poor isle and all of us ourselves
	When no man was his own.

ALONSO	[To FERDINAND and MIRANDA]  Give me your hands:
	Let grief and sorrow still embrace his heart
	That doth not wish you joy!

GONZALO	Be it so! Amen!

	[Re-enter ARIEL, with the Master and Boatswain
	amazedly following]

	O, look, sir, look, sir! here is more of us:
	I prophesied, if a gallows were on land,
	This fellow could not drown. Now, blasphemy,
	That swear'st grace o'erboard, not an oath on shore?
	Hast thou no mouth by land? What is the news?

Boatswain	The best news is, that we have safely found
	Our king and company; the next, our ship--
	Which, but three glasses since, we gave out split--
	Is tight and yare and bravely rigg'd as when
	We first put out to sea.

ARIEL	[Aside to PROSPERO]  Sir, all this service
	Have I done since I went.

PROSPERO	[Aside to ARIEL]  My tricksy spirit!

ALONSO	These are not natural events; they strengthen
	From strange to stranger. Say, how came you hither?

Boatswain	If I did think, sir, I were well awake,
	I'ld strive to tell you. We were dead of sleep,
	And--how we know not--all clapp'd under hatches;
	Where but even now with strange and several noises
	Of roaring, shrieking, howling, jingling chains,
	And more diversity of sounds, all horrible,
	We were awaked; straightway, at liberty;
	Where we, in all her trim, freshly beheld
	Our royal, good and gallant ship, our master
	Capering to eye her: on a trice, so please you,
	Even in a dream, were we divided from them
	And were brought moping hither.

ARIEL	[Aside to PROSPERO]          Was't well done?

PROSPERO	[Aside to ARIEL]  Bravely, my diligence. Thou shalt be free.

ALONSO	This is as strange a maze as e'er men trod
	And there is in this business more than nature
	Was ever conduct of: some oracle
	Must rectify our knowledge.

PROSPERO	Sir, my liege,
	Do not infest your mind with beating on
	The strangeness of this business; at pick'd leisure
	Which shall be shortly, single I'll resolve you,
	Which to you shall seem probable, of every
	These happen'd accidents; till when, be cheerful
	And think of each thing well.

	[Aside to ARIEL]

		        Come hither, spirit:
	Set Caliban and his companions free;
	Untie the spell.

	[Exit ARIEL]

	How fares my gracious sir?
	There are yet missing of your company
	Some few odd lads that you remember not.

	[Re-enter ARIEL, driving in CALIBAN, STEPHANO
	and TRINCULO, in their stolen apparel]

STEPHANO	Every man shift for all the rest, and
	let no man take care for himself; for all is
	but fortune. Coragio, bully-monster, coragio!

TRINCULO	If these be true spies which I wear in my head,
	here's a goodly sight.

CALIBAN	O Setebos, these be brave spirits indeed!
	How fine my master is! I am afraid
	He will chastise me.

SEBASTIAN	Ha, ha!
	What things are these, my lord Antonio?
	Will money buy 'em?

ANTONIO	Very like; one of them
	Is a plain fish, and, no doubt, marketable.

PROSPERO	Mark but the badges of these men, my lords,
	Then say if they be true. This mis-shapen knave,
	His mother was a witch, and one so strong
	That could control the moon, make flows and ebbs,
	And deal in her command without her power.
	These three have robb'd me; and this demi-devil--
	For he's a bastard one--had plotted with them
	To take my life. Two of these fellows you
	Must know and own; this thing of darkness!
	Acknowledge mine.

CALIBAN	                  I shall be pinch'd to death.

ALONSO	Is not this Stephano, my drunken butler?

SEBASTIAN	He is drunk now: where had he wine?

ALONSO	And Trinculo is reeling ripe: where should they
	Find this grand liquor that hath gilded 'em?
	How camest thou in this pickle?

TRINCULO	I have been in such a pickle since I
	saw you last that, I fear me, will never out of
	my bones: I shall not fear fly-blowing.

SEBASTIAN	Why, how now, Stephano!

STEPHANO	O, touch me not; I am not Stephano, but a cramp.

PROSPERO	You'ld be king o' the isle, sirrah?

STEPHANO	I should have been a sore one then.

ALONSO	This is a strange thing as e'er I look'd on.

	[Pointing to Caliban]

PROSPERO	He is as disproportion'd in his manners
	As in his shape. Go, sirrah, to my cell;
	Take with you your companions; as you look
	To have my pardon, trim it handsomely.

CALIBAN	Ay, that I will; and I'll be wise hereafter
	And seek for grace. What a thrice-double ass
	Was I, to take this drunkard for a god
	And worship this dull fool!

PROSPERO	Go to; away!

ALONSO	Hence, and bestow your luggage where you found it.

SEBASTIAN	Or stole it, rather.

	[Exeunt CALIBAN, STEPHANO, and TRINCULO]

PROSPERO	Sir, I invite your highness and your train
	To my poor cell, where you shall take your rest
	For this one night; which, part of it, I'll waste
	With such discourse as, I not doubt, shall make it
	Go quick away; the story of my life
	And the particular accidents gone by
	Since I came to this isle: and in the morn
	I'll bring you to your ship and so to Naples,
	Where I have hope to see the nuptial
	Of these our dear-beloved solemnized;
	And thence retire me to my Milan, where
	Every third thought shall be my grave.

ALONSO	I long
	To hear the story of your life, which must
	Take the ear strangely.

PROSPERO	I'll deliver all;
	And promise you calm seas, auspicious gales
	And sail so expeditious that shall catch
	Your royal fleet far off.

	[Aside to ARIEL]

		    My Ariel, chick,
	That is thy charge: then to the elements
	Be free, and fare thou well! Please you, draw near.

	[Exeunt]




	THE TEMPEST

	EPILOGUE


	SPOKEN BY PROSPERO

	Now my charms are all o'erthrown,
	And what strength I have's mine own,
	Which is most faint: now, 'tis true,
	I must be here confined by you,
	Or sent to Naples. Let me not,
	Since I have my dukedom got
	And pardon'd the deceiver, dwell
	In this bare island by your spell;
	But release me from my bands
	With the help of your good hands:
	Gentle breath of yours my sails
	Must fill, or else my project fails,
	Which was to please. Now I want
	Spirits to enforce, art to enchant,
	And my ending is despair,
	Unless I be relieved by prayer,
	Which pierces so that it assaults
	Mercy itself and frees all faults.
	As you from crimes would pardon'd be,
	Let your indulgence set me free.


	VENUS AND ADONIS



'Vilia miretur vulgus; mihi flavus Apollo
Pocula Castalia plena ministret aqua.'

TO THE
RIGHT HONORABLE HENRY WRIOTHESLY,
EARL OF SOUTHAMPTON, AND BARON OF TICHFIELD.
RIGHT HONORABLE,

I KNOW not how I shall offend in dedicating my
unpolished lines to your lordship, nor how the world will
censure me for choosing so strong a prop to support so weak a
burden only, if your honour seem but pleased, I account
myself highly praised, and vow to take advantage of all idle
hours, till I have honoured you with some graver labour. But if
the first heir of my invention prove deformed, I shall be
sorry it had so noble a god-father, and never after ear so
barren a land, for fear it yield me still so bad a harvest.
I leave it to your honourable survey, and your honour to your
heart's content; which I wish may always answer your own wish
and the world's hopeful expectation.

Your honour's in all duty,
WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE.



EVEN as the sun with purple-colour'd face
Had ta'en his last leave of the weeping morn,
Rose-cheek'd Adonis hied him to the chase;
Hunting he loved, but love he laugh'd to scorn;
Sick-thoughted Venus makes amain unto him,
And like a bold-faced suitor 'gins to woo him.

'Thrice-fairer than myself,' thus she began,
'The field's chief flower, sweet above compare,
Stain to all nymphs, more lovely than a man,
More white and red than doves or roses are;
Nature that made thee, with herself at strife,
Saith that the world hath ending with thy life.

'Vouchsafe, thou wonder, to alight thy steed,
And rein his proud head to the saddle-bow;
If thou wilt deign this favour, for thy meed
A thousand honey secrets shalt thou know:
Here come and sit, where never serpent hisses,
And being set, I'll smother thee with kisses;

'And yet not cloy thy lips with loathed satiety,
But rather famish them amid their plenty,
Making them red and pale with fresh variety,
Ten kisses short as one, one long as twenty:
A summer's day will seem an hour but short,
Being wasted in such time-beguiling sport.'

With this she seizeth on his sweating palm,
The precedent of pith and livelihood,
And trembling in her passion, calls it balm,
Earth's sovereign salve to do a goddess good:
Being so enraged, desire doth lend her force
Courageously to pluck him from his horse.

Over one arm the lusty courser's rein,
Under her other was the tender boy,
Who blush'd and pouted in a dull disdain,
With leaden appetite, unapt to toy;
She red and hot as coals of glowing fire,
He red for shame, but frosty in desire.

The studded bridle on a ragged bough
Nimbly she fastens:--O, how quick is love!--
The steed is stalled up, and even now
To tie the rider she begins to prove:
Backward she push'd him, as she would be thrust,
And govern'd him in strength, though not in lust.

So soon was she along as he was down,
Each leaning on their elbows and their hips:
Now doth she stroke his cheek, now doth he frown,
And 'gins to chide, but soon she stops his lips;
And kissing speaks, with lustful language broken,
'If thou wilt chide, thy lips shall never open.'

He burns with bashful shame: she with her tears
Doth quench the maiden burning of his cheeks;
Then with her windy sighs and golden hairs
To fan and blow them dry again she seeks:
He saith she is immodest, blames her 'miss;
What follows more she murders with a kiss.

Even as an empty eagle, sharp by fast,
Tires with her beak on feathers, flesh and bone,
Shaking her wings, devouring all in haste,
Till either gorge be stuff'd or prey be gone;
Even so she kissed his brow, his cheek, his chin,
And where she ends she doth anew begin.

Forced to content, but never to obey,
Panting he lies and breatheth in her face;
She feedeth on the steam as on a prey,
And calls it heavenly moisture, air of grace;
Wishing her cheeks were gardens full of flowers,
So they were dew'd with such distilling showers.

Look, how a bird lies tangled in a net,
So fasten'd in her arms Adonis lies;
Pure shame and awed resistance made him fret,
Which bred more beauty in his angry eyes:
Rain added to a river that is rank
Perforce will force it overflow the bank.

Still she entreats, and prettily entreats,
For to a pretty ear she tunes her tale;
Still is he sullen, still he lours and frets,
'Twixt crimson shame and anger ashy-pale:
Being red, she loves him best; and being white,
Her best is better'd with a more delight.

Look how he can, she cannot choose but love;
And by her fair immortal hand she swears,
From his soft bosom never to remove,
Till he take truce with her contending tears,
Which long have rain'd, making her cheeks all wet;
And one sweet kiss shall pay this countless debt.

Upon this promise did he raise his chin,
Like a dive-dapper peering through a wave,
Who, being look'd on, ducks as quickly in;
So offers he to give what she did crave;
But when her lips were ready for his pay,
He winks, and turns his lips another way.

Never did passenger in summer's heat
More thirst for drink than she for this good turn.
Her help she sees, but help she cannot get;
She bathes in water, yet her fire must burn:
'O, pity,' 'gan she cry, 'flint-hearted boy!
'Tis but a kiss I beg; why art thou coy?

'I have been woo'd, as I entreat thee now,
Even by the stern and direful god of war,
Whose sinewy neck in battle ne'er did bow,
Who conquers where he comes in every jar;
Yet hath he been my captive and my slave,
And begg'd for that which thou unask'd shalt have.

'Over my altars hath he hung his lance,
His batter'd shield, his uncontrolled crest,
And for my sake hath learn'd to sport and dance,
To toy, to wanton, dally, smile and jest,
Scorning his churlish drum and ensign red,
Making my arms his field, his tent my bed.

'Thus he that overruled I oversway'd,
Leading him prisoner in a red-rose chain:
Strong-tempered steel his stronger strength obey'd,
Yet was he servile to my coy disdain.
O, be not proud, nor brag not of thy might,
For mastering her that foil'd the god of fight!

'Touch but my lips with those fair lips of thine,--
Though mine be not so fair, yet are they red--
The kiss shall be thine own as well as mine.
What seest thou in the ground? hold up thy head:
Look in mine eye-balls, there thy beauty lies;
Then why not lips on lips, since eyes in eyes?
'Art thou ashamed to kiss? then wink again,
And I will wink; so shall the day seem night;
Love keeps his revels where they are but twain;
Be bold to play, our sport is not in sight:
These blue-vein'd violets whereon we lean
Never can blab, nor know not what we mean.

'The tender spring upon thy tempting lip
Shows thee unripe; yet mayst thou well be tasted:
Make use of time, let not advantage slip;
Beauty within itself should not be wasted:
Fair flowers that are not gather'd in their prime
Rot and consume themselves in little time.

'Were I hard-favour'd, foul, or wrinkled-old,
Ill-nurtured, crooked, churlish, harsh in voice,
O'erworn, despised, rheumatic and cold,
Thick-sighted, barren, lean and lacking juice,
Then mightst thou pause, for then I were not for thee
But having no defects, why dost abhor me?

'Thou canst not see one wrinkle in my brow;
Mine eyes are gray and bright and quick in turning:
My beauty as the spring doth yearly grow,
My flesh is soft and plump, my marrow burning;
My smooth moist hand, were it with thy hand felt,
Would in thy palm dissolve, or seem to melt.

'Bid me discourse, I will enchant thine ear,
Or, like a fairy, trip upon the green,
Or, like a nymph, with long dishevell'd hair,
Dance on the sands, and yet no footing seen:
Love is a spirit all compact of fire,
Not gross to sink, but light, and will aspire.

'Witness this primrose bank whereon I lie;
These forceless flowers like sturdy trees support me;
Two strengthless doves will draw me through the sky,
From morn till night, even where I list to sport me:
Is love so light, sweet boy, and may it be
That thou shouldst think it heavy unto thee?

'Is thine own heart to thine own face affected?
Can thy right hand seize love upon thy left?
Then woo thyself, be of thyself rejected,
Steal thine own freedom and complain on theft.
Narcissus so himself himself forsook,
And died to kiss his shadow in the brook.

'Torches are made to light, jewels to wear,
Dainties to taste, fresh beauty for the use,
Herbs for their smell, and sappy plants to bear:
Things growing to themselves are growth's abuse:
Seeds spring from seeds and beauty breedeth beauty;
Thou wast begot; to get it is thy duty.

'Upon the earth's increase why shouldst thou feed,
Unless the earth with thy increase be fed?
By law of nature thou art bound to breed,
That thine may live when thou thyself art dead;
And so, in spite of death, thou dost survive,
In that thy likeness still is left alive.'

By this the love-sick queen began to sweat,
For where they lay the shadow had forsook them,
And Titan, tired in the mid-day heat,
With burning eye did hotly overlook them;
Wishing Adonis had his team to guide,
So he were like him and by Venus' side.

And now Adonis, with a lazy spright,
And with a heavy, dark, disliking eye,
His louring brows o'erwhelming his fair sight,
Like misty vapours when they blot the sky,
Souring his cheeks cries 'Fie, no more of love!
The sun doth burn my face: I must remove.'

'Ay me,' quoth Venus, 'young, and so unkind?
What bare excuses makest thou to be gone!
I'll sigh celestial breath, whose gentle wind
Shall cool the heat of this descending sun:
I'll make a shadow for thee of my hairs;
If they burn too, I'll quench them with my tears.

'The sun that shines from heaven shines but warm,
And, lo, I lie between that sun and thee:
The heat I have from thence doth little harm,
Thine eye darts forth the fire that burneth me;
And were I not immortal, life were done
Between this heavenly and earthly sun.

'Art thou obdurate, flinty, hard as steel,
Nay, more than flint, for stone at rain relenteth?
Art thou a woman's son, and canst not feel
What 'tis to love? how want of love tormenteth?
O, had thy mother borne so hard a mind,
She had not brought forth thee, but died unkind.

'What am I, that thou shouldst contemn me this?
Or what great danger dwells upon my suit?
What were thy lips the worse for one poor kiss?
Speak, fair; but speak fair words, or else be mute:
Give me one kiss, I'll give it thee again,
And one for interest, if thou wilt have twain.

'Fie, lifeless picture, cold and senseless stone,
Well-painted idol, image dun and dead,
Statue contenting but the eye alone,
Thing like a man, but of no woman bred!
Thou art no man, though of a man's complexion,
For men will kiss even by their own direction.'

This said, impatience chokes her pleading tongue,
And swelling passion doth provoke a pause;
Red cheeks and fiery eyes blaze forth he wrong;
Being judge in love, she cannot right her cause:
And now she weeps, and now she fain would speak,
And now her sobs do her intendments break.

Sometimes she shakes her head and then his hand,
Now gazeth she on him, now on the ground;
Sometimes her arms infold him like a band:
She would, he will not in her arms be bound;
And when from thence he struggles to be gone,
She locks her lily fingers one in one.

'Fondling,' she saith, 'since I have hemm'd thee here
Within the circuit of this ivory pale,
I'll be a park, and thou shalt be my deer;
Feed where thou wilt, on mountain or in dale:
Graze on my lips; and if those hills be dry,
Stray lower, where the pleasant fountains lie.

Within this limit is relief enough,
Sweet bottom-grass and high delightful plain,
Round rising hillocks, brakes obscure and rough,
To shelter thee from tempest and from rain
Then be my deer, since I am such a park;
No dog shall rouse thee, though a thousand bark.'

At this Adonis smiles as in disdain,
That in each cheek appears a pretty dimple:
Love made those hollows, if himself were slain,
He might be buried in a tomb so simple;
Foreknowing well, if there he came to lie,
Why, there Love lived and there he could not die.

These lovely caves, these round enchanting pits,
Open'd their mouths to swallow Venus' liking.
Being mad before, how doth she now for wits?
Struck dead at first, what needs a second striking?
Poor queen of love, in thine own law forlorn,
To love a cheek that smiles at thee in scorn!

Now which way shall she turn? what shall she say?
Her words are done, her woes are more increasing;
The time is spent, her object will away,
And from her twining arms doth urge releasing.
'Pity,' she cries, 'some favour, some remorse!'
Away he springs and hasteth to his horse.

But, lo, from forth a copse that neighbors by,
A breeding jennet, lusty, young and proud,
Adonis' trampling courser doth espy,
And forth she rushes, snorts and neighs aloud:
The strong-neck'd steed, being tied unto a tree,
Breaketh his rein, and to her straight goes he.

Imperiously he leaps, he neighs, he bounds,
And now his woven girths he breaks asunder;
The bearing earth with his hard hoof he wounds,
Whose hollow womb resounds like heaven's thunder;
The iron bit he crusheth 'tween his teeth,
Controlling what he was controlled with.

His ears up-prick'd; his braided hanging mane
Upon his compass'd crest now stand on end;
His nostrils drink the air, and forth again,
As from a furnace, vapours doth he send:
His eye, which scornfully glisters like fire,
Shows his hot courage and his high desire.

Sometime he trots, as if he told the steps,
With gentle majesty and modest pride;
Anon he rears upright, curvets and leaps,
As who should say 'Lo, thus my strength is tried,
And this I do to captivate the eye
Of the fair breeder that is standing by.'

What recketh he his rider's angry stir,
His flattering 'Holla,' or his 'Stand, I say'?
What cares he now for curb or pricking spur?
For rich caparisons or trapping gay?
He sees his love, and nothing else he sees,
For nothing else with his proud sight agrees.

Look, when a painter would surpass the life,
In limning out a well-proportion'd steed,
His art with nature's workmanship at strife,
As if the dead the living should exceed;
So did this horse excel a common one
In shape, in courage, colour, pace and bone.

Round-hoof'd, short-jointed, fetlocks shag and long,
Broad breast, full eye, small head and nostril wide,
High crest, short ears, straight legs and passing strong,
Thin mane, thick tail, broad buttock, tender hide:
Look, what a horse should have he did not lack,
Save a proud rider on so proud a back.

Sometime he scuds far off and there he stares;
Anon he starts at stirring of a feather;
To bid the wind a base he now prepares,
And whether he run or fly they know not whether;
For through his mane and tail the high wind sings,
Fanning the hairs, who wave like feather'd wings.

He looks upon his love and neighs unto her;
She answers him as if she knew his mind:
Being proud, as females are, to see him woo her,
She puts on outward strangeness, seems unkind,
Spurns at his love and scorns the heat he feels,
Beating his kind embracements with her heels.

Then, like a melancholy malcontent,
He veils his tail that, like a falling plume,
Cool shadow to his melting buttock lent:
He stamps and bites the poor flies in his fume.
His love, perceiving how he is enraged,
Grew kinder, and his fury was assuaged.

His testy master goeth about to take him;
When, lo, the unback'd breeder, full of fear,
Jealous of catching, swiftly doth forsake him,
With her the horse, and left Adonis there:
As they were mad, unto the wood they hie them,
Out-stripping crows that strive to over-fly them.

All swoln with chafing, down Adonis sits,
Banning his boisterous and unruly beast:
And now the happy season once more fits,
That love-sick Love by pleading may be blest;
For lovers say, the heart hath treble wrong
When it is barr'd the aidance of the tongue.

An oven that is stopp'd, or river stay'd,
Burneth more hotly, swelleth with more rage:
So of concealed sorrow may be said;
Free vent of words love's fire doth assuage;
But when the heart's attorney once is mute,
The client breaks, as desperate in his suit.

He sees her coming, and begins to glow,
Even as a dying coal revives with wind,
And with his bonnet hides his angry brow;
Looks on the dull earth with disturbed mind,
Taking no notice that she is so nigh,
For all askance he holds her in his eye.

O, what a sight it was, wistly to view
How she came stealing to the wayward boy!
To note the fighting conflict of her hue,
How white and red each other did destroy!
But now her cheek was pale, and by and by
It flash'd forth fire, as lightning from the sky.

Now was she just before him as he sat,
And like a lowly lover down she kneels;
With one fair hand she heaveth up his hat,
Her other tender hand his fair cheek feels:
His tenderer cheek receives her soft hand's print,
As apt as new-fall'n snow takes any dint.

O, what a war of looks was then between them!
Her eyes petitioners to his eyes suing;
His eyes saw her eyes as they had not seen them;
Her eyes woo'd still, his eyes disdain'd the wooing:
And all this dumb play had his acts made plain
With tears, which, chorus-like, her eyes did rain.

Full gently now she takes him by the hand,
A lily prison'd in a gaol of snow,
Or ivory in an alabaster band;
So white a friend engirts so white a foe:
This beauteous combat, wilful and unwilling,
Show'd like two silver doves that sit a-billing.

Once more the engine of her thoughts began:
'O fairest mover on this mortal round,
Would thou wert as I am, and I a man,
My heart all whole as thine, thy heart my wound;
For one sweet look thy help I would assure thee,
Though nothing but my body's bane would cure thee!

'Give me my hand,' saith he, 'why dost thou feel it?'
'Give me my heart,' saith she, 'and thou shalt have it:
O, give it me, lest thy hard heart do steel it,
And being steel'd, soft sighs can never grave it:
Then love's deep groans I never shall regard,
Because Adonis' heart hath made mine hard.'

'For shame,' he cries, 'let go, and let me go;
My day's delight is past, my horse is gone,
And 'tis your fault I am bereft him so:
I pray you hence, and leave me here alone;
For all my mind, my thought, my busy care,
Is how to get my palfrey from the mare.'

Thus she replies: 'Thy palfrey, as he should,
Welcomes the warm approach of sweet desire:
Affection is a coal that must be cool'd;
Else, suffer'd, it will set the heart on fire:
The sea hath bounds, but deep desire hath none;
Therefore no marvel though thy horse be gone.

'How like a jade he stood, tied to the tree,
Servilely master'd with a leathern rein!
But when he saw his love, his youth's fair fee,
He held such petty bondage in disdain;
Throwing the base thong from his bending crest,
Enfranchising his mouth, his back, his breast.

'Who sees his true-love in her naked bed,
Teaching the sheets a whiter hue than white,
But, when his glutton eye so full hath fed,
His other agents aim at like delight?
Who is so faint, that dare not be so bold
To touch the fire, the weather being cold?

'Let me excuse thy courser, gentle boy;
And learn of him, I heartily beseech thee,
To take advantage on presented joy;
Though I were dumb, yet his proceedings teach thee;
O, learn to love; the lesson is but plain,
And once made perfect, never lost again.'

I know not love,' quoth he, 'nor will not know it,
Unless it be a boar, and then I chase it;
'Tis much to borrow, and I will not owe it;
My love to love is love but to disgrace it;
For I have heard it is a life in death,
That laughs and weeps, and all but with a breath.

'Who wears a garment shapeless and unfinish'd?
Who plucks the bud before one leaf put forth?
If springing things be any jot diminish'd,
They wither in their prime, prove nothing worth:
The colt that's back'd and burden'd being young
Loseth his pride and never waxeth strong.

'You hurt my hand with wringing; let us part,
And leave this idle theme, this bootless chat:
Remove your siege from my unyielding heart;
To love's alarms it will not ope the gate:
Dismiss your vows, your feigned tears, your flattery;
For where a heart is hard they make no battery.'

'What! canst thou talk?' quoth she, 'hast thou a tongue?
O, would thou hadst not, or I had no hearing!
Thy mermaid's voice hath done me double wrong;
I had my load before, now press'd with bearing:
Melodious discord, heavenly tune harshsounding,
Ear's deep-sweet music, and heart's deep-sore wounding.

'Had I no eyes but ears, my ears would love
That inward beauty and invisible;
Or were I deaf, thy outward parts would move
Each part in me that were but sensible:
Though neither eyes nor ears, to hear nor see,
Yet should I be in love by touching thee.

'Say, that the sense of feeling were bereft me,
And that I could not see, nor hear, nor touch,
And nothing but the very smell were left me,
Yet would my love to thee be still as much;
For from the stillitory of thy face excelling
Comes breath perfumed that breedeth love by
smelling.

'But, O, what banquet wert thou to the taste,
Being nurse and feeder of the other four!
Would they not wish the feast might ever last,
And bid Suspicion double-lock the door,
Lest Jealousy, that sour unwelcome guest,
Should, by his stealing in, disturb the feast?'

Once more the ruby-colour'd portal open'd,
Which to his speech did honey passage yield;
Like a red morn, that ever yet betoken'd
Wreck to the seaman, tempest to the field,
Sorrow to shepherds, woe unto the birds,
Gusts and foul flaws to herdmen and to herds.

This ill presage advisedly she marketh:
Even as the wind is hush'd before it raineth,
Or as the wolf doth grin before he barketh,
Or as the berry breaks before it staineth,
Or like the deadly bullet of a gun,
His meaning struck her ere his words begun.

And at his look she flatly falleth down,
For looks kill love and love by looks reviveth;
A smile recures the wounding of a frown;
But blessed bankrupt, that by love so thriveth!
The silly boy, believing she is dead,
Claps her pale cheek, till clapping makes it red;

And all amazed brake off his late intent,
For sharply he did think to reprehend her,
Which cunning love did wittily prevent:
Fair fall the wit that can so well defend her!
For on the grass she lies as she were slain,
Till his breath breatheth life in her again.

He wrings her nose, he strikes her on the cheeks,
He bends her fingers, holds her pulses hard,
He chafes her lips; a thousand ways he seeks
To mend the hurt that his unkindness marr'd:
He kisses her; and she, by her good will,
Will never rise, so he will kiss her still.

The night of sorrow now is turn'd to day:
Her two blue windows faintly she up-heaveth,
Like the fair sun, when in his fresh array
He cheers the morn and all the earth relieveth;
And as the bright sun glorifies the sky,
So is her face illumined with her eye;

Whose beams upon his hairless face are fix'd,
As if from thence they borrow'd all their shine.
Were never four such lamps together mix'd,
Had not his clouded with his brow's repine;
But hers, which through the crystal tears gave light,
Shone like the moon in water seen by night.

'O, where am I?' quoth she, 'in earth or heaven,
Or in the ocean drench'd, or in the fire?
What hour is this? or morn or weary even?
Do I delight to die, or life desire?
But now I lived, and life was death's annoy;
But now I died, and death was lively joy.

'O, thou didst kill me: kill me once again:
Thy eyes' shrewd tutor, that hard heart of thine,
Hath taught them scornful tricks and such disdain
That they have murder'd this poor heart of mine;
And these mine eyes, true leaders to their queen,
But for thy piteous lips no more had seen.

'Long may they kiss each other, for this cure!
O, never let their crimson liveries wear!
And as they last, their verdure still endure,
To drive infection from the dangerous year!
That the star-gazers, having writ on death,
May say, the plague is banish'd by thy breath.

'Pure lips, sweet seals in my soft lips imprinted,
What bargains may I make, still to be sealing?
To sell myself I can be well contented,
So thou wilt buy and pay and use good dealing;
Which purchase if thou make, for fear of slips
Set thy seal-manual on my wax-red lips.

'A thousand kisses buys my heart from me;
And pay them at thy leisure, one by one.
What is ten hundred touches unto thee?
Are they not quickly told and quickly gone?
Say, for non-payment that the debt should double,
Is twenty hundred kisses such a trouble?

'Fair queen,' quoth he, 'if any love you owe me,
Measure my strangeness with my unripe years:
Before I know myself, seek not to know me;
No fisher but the ungrown fry forbears:
The mellow plum doth fall, the green sticks fast,
Or being early pluck'd is sour to taste.

'Look, the world's comforter, with weary gait,
His day's hot task hath ended in the west;
The owl, night's herald, shrieks, ''Tis very late;'
The sheep are gone to fold, birds to their nest,
And coal-black clouds that shadow heaven's light
Do summon us to part and bid good night.

'Now let me say 'Good night,' and so say you;
If you will say so, you shall have a kiss.'
'Good night,' quoth she, and, ere he says 'Adieu,'
The honey fee of parting tender'd is:
Her arms do lend his neck a sweet embrace;
Incorporate then they seem; face grows to face.

Till, breathless, he disjoin'd, and backward drew
The heavenly moisture, that sweet coral mouth,
Whose precious taste her thirsty lips well knew,
Whereon they surfeit, yet complain on drouth:
He with her plenty press'd, she faint with dearth
Their lips together glued, fall to the earth.

Now quick desire hath caught the yielding prey,
And glutton-like she feeds, yet never filleth;
Her lips are conquerors, his lips obey,
Paying what ransom the insulter willeth;
Whose vulture thought doth pitch the price so high,
That she will draw his lips' rich treasure dry:

And having felt the sweetness of the spoil,
With blindfold fury she begins to forage;
Her face doth reek and smoke, her blood doth boil,
And careless lust stirs up a desperate courage,
Planting oblivion, beating reason back,
Forgetting shame's pure blush and honour's wrack.

Hot, faint, and weary, with her hard embracing,
Like a wild bird being tamed with too much handling,
Or as the fleet-foot roe that's tired with chasing,
Or like the froward infant still'd with dandling,
He now obeys, and now no more resisteth,
While she takes all she can, not all she listeth.

What wax so frozen but dissolves with tempering,
And yields at last to every light impression?
Things out of hope are compass'd oft with venturing,
Chiefly in love, whose leave exceeds commission:
Affection faints not like a pale-faced coward,
But then woos best when most his choice is froward.

When he did frown, O, had she then gave over,
Such nectar from his lips she had not suck'd.
Foul words and frowns must not repel a lover;
What though the rose have prickles, yet 'tis pluck'd:
Were beauty under twenty locks kept fast,
Yet love breaks through and picks them all at last.

For pity now she can no more detain him;
The poor fool prays her that he may depart:
She is resolved no longer to restrain him;
Bids him farewell, and look well to her heart,
The which, by Cupid's bow she doth protest,
He carries thence incaged in his breast.

'Sweet boy,' she says, 'this night I'll waste in sorrow,
For my sick heart commands mine eyes to watch.
Tell me, Love's master, shall we meet to-morrow?
Say, shall we? shall we? wilt thou make the match?'
He tells her, no; to-morrow he intends
To hunt the boar with certain of his friends.

'The boar!' quoth she; whereat a sudden pale,
Like lawn being spread upon the blushing rose,
Usurps her cheek; she trembles at his tale,
And on his neck her yoking arms she throws:
She sinketh down, still hanging by his neck,
He on her belly falls, she on her back.

Now is she in the very lists of love,
Her champion mounted for the hot encounter:
All is imaginary she doth prove,
He will not manage her, although he mount her;
That worse than Tantalus' is her annoy,
To clip Elysium and to lack her joy.

Even as poor birds, deceived with painted grapes,
Do surfeit by the eye and pine the maw,
Even so she languisheth in her mishaps,
As those poor birds that helpless berries saw.
The warm effects which she in him finds missing
She seeks to kindle with continual kissing.

But all in vain; good queen, it will not be:
She hath assay'd as much as may be proved;
Her pleading hath deserved a greater fee;
She's Love, she loves, and yet she is not loved.
'Fie, fie,' he says, 'you crush me; let me go;
You have no reason to withhold me so.'

'Thou hadst been gone,' quoth she, 'sweet boy, ere this,
But that thou told'st me thou wouldst hunt the boar.
O, be advised! thou know'st not what it is
With javelin's point a churlish swine to gore,
Whose tushes never sheathed he whetteth still,
Like to a mortal butcher bent to kill.

'On his bow-back he hath a battle set
Of bristly pikes, that ever threat his foes;
His eyes, like glow-worms, shine when he doth fret;
His snout digs sepulchres where'er he goes;
Being moved, he strikes whate'er is in his way,
And whom he strikes his cruel tushes slay.

'His brawny sides, with hairy bristles arm'd,
Are better proof than thy spear's point can enter;
His short thick neck cannot be easily harm'd;
Being ireful, on the lion he will venture:
The thorny brambles and embracing bushes,
As fearful of him, part, through whom he rushes.

'Alas, he nought esteems that face of thine,
To which Love's eyes pay tributary gazes;
Nor thy soft hands, sweet lips and crystal eyne,
Whose full perfection all the world amazes;
But having thee at vantage,--wondrous dread!--
Would root these beauties as he roots the mead.

'O, let him keep his loathsome cabin still;
Beauty hath nought to do with such foul fiends:
Come not within his danger by thy will;
They that thrive well take counsel of their friends.
When thou didst name the boar, not to dissemble,
I fear'd thy fortune, and my joints did tremble.

'Didst thou not mark my face? was it not white?
Saw'st thou not signs of fear lurk in mine eye?
Grew I not faint? and fell I not downright?
Within my bosom, whereon thou dost lie,
My boding heart pants, beats, and takes no rest,
But, like an earthquake, shakes thee on my breast.

'For where Love reigns, disturbing Jealousy
Doth call himself Affection's sentinel;
Gives false alarms, suggesteth mutiny,
And in a peaceful hour doth cry 'Kill, kill!'
Distempering gentle Love in his desire,
As air and water do abate the fire.

'This sour informer, this bate-breeding spy,
This canker that eats up Love's tender spring,
This carry-tale, dissentious Jealousy,
That sometime true news, sometime false doth bring,
Knocks at my heat and whispers in mine ear
That if I love thee, I thy death should fear:

'And more than so, presenteth to mine eye
The picture of an angry-chafing boar,
Under whose sharp fangs on his back doth lie
An image like thyself, all stain'd with gore;
Whose blood upon the fresh flowers being shed
Doth make them droop with grief and hang the head.

'What should I do, seeing thee so indeed,
That tremble at the imagination?
The thought of it doth make my faint heart bleed,
And fear doth teach it divination:
I prophesy thy death, my living sorrow,
If thou encounter with the boar to-morrow.

'But if thou needs wilt hunt, be ruled by me;
Uncouple at the timorous flying hare,
Or at the fox which lives by subtlety,
Or at the roe which no encounter dare:
Pursue these fearful creatures o'er the downs,
And on thy well-breath'd horse keep with thy
hounds.

'And when thou hast on foot the purblind hare,
Mark the poor wretch, to overshoot his troubles
How he outruns the wind and with what care
He cranks and crosses with a thousand doubles:
The many musets through the which he goes
Are like a labyrinth to amaze his foes.

'Sometime he runs among a flock of sheep,
To make the cunning hounds mistake their smell,
And sometime where earth-delving conies keep,
To stop the loud pursuers in their yell,
And sometime sorteth with a herd of deer:
Danger deviseth shifts; wit waits on fear:

'For there his smell with others being mingled,
The hot scent-snuffing hounds are driven to doubt,
Ceasing their clamorous cry till they have singled
With much ado the cold fault cleanly out;
Then do they spend their mouths: Echo replies,
As if another chase were in the skies.

'By this, poor Wat, far off upon a hill,
Stands on his hinder legs with listening ear,
To harken if his foes pursue him still:
Anon their loud alarums he doth hear;
And now his grief may be compared well
To one sore sick that hears the passing-bell.

'Then shalt thou see the dew-bedabbled wretch
Turn, and return, indenting with the way;
Each envious brier his weary legs doth scratch,
Each shadow makes him stop, each murmur stay:
For misery is trodden on by many,
And being low never relieved by any.

'Lie quietly, and hear a little more;
Nay, do not struggle, for thou shalt not rise:
To make thee hate the hunting of the boar,
Unlike myself thou hear'st me moralize,
Applying this to that, and so to so;
For love can comment upon every woe.

'Where did I leave?' 'No matter where,' quoth he,
'Leave me, and then the story aptly ends:
The night is spent.' 'Why, what of that?' quoth she.
'I am,' quoth he, 'expected of my friends;
And now 'tis dark, and going I shall fall.'
'In night,' quoth she, 'desire sees best of all

'But if thou fall, O, then imagine this,
The earth, in love with thee, thy footing trips,
And all is but to rob thee of a kiss.
Rich preys make true men thieves; so do thy lips
Make modest Dian cloudy and forlorn,
Lest she should steal a kiss and die forsworn.

'Now of this dark night I perceive the reason:
Cynthia for shame obscures her silver shine,
Till forging Nature be condemn'd of treason,
For stealing moulds from heaven that were divine;
Wherein she framed thee in high heaven's despite,
To shame the sun by day and her by night.

'And therefore hath she bribed the Destinies
To cross the curious workmanship of nature,
To mingle beauty with infirmities,
And pure perfection with impure defeature,
Making it subject to the tyranny
Of mad mischances and much misery;

'As burning fevers, agues pale and faint,
Life-poisoning pestilence and frenzies wood,
The marrow-eating sickness, whose attaint
Disorder breeds by heating of the blood:
Surfeits, imposthumes, grief, and damn'd despair,
Swear nature's death for framing thee so fair.

'And not the least of all these maladies
But in one minute's fight brings beauty under:
Both favour, savour, hue and qualities,
Whereat the impartial gazer late did wonder,
Are on the sudden wasted, thaw'd and done,
As mountain-snow melts with the midday sun.

'Therefore, despite of fruitless chastity,
Love-lacking vestals and self-loving nuns,
That on the earth would breed a scarcity
And barren dearth of daughters and of sons,
Be prodigal: the lamp that burns by night
Dries up his oil to lend the world his light.

'What is thy body but a swallowing grave,
Seeming to bury that posterity
Which by the rights of time thou needs must have,
If thou destroy them not in dark obscurity?
If so, the world will hold thee in disdain,
Sith in thy pride so fair a hope is slain.

'So in thyself thyself art made away;
A mischief worse than civil home-bred strife,
Or theirs whose desperate hands themselves do slay,
Or butcher-sire that reaves his son of life.
Foul-cankering rust the hidden treasure frets,
But gold that's put to use more gold begets.'

'Nay, then,' quoth Adon, 'you will fall again
Into your idle over-handled theme:
The kiss I gave you is bestow'd in vain,
And all in vain you strive against the stream;
For, by this black-faced night, desire's foul nurse,
Your treatise makes me like you worse and worse.

'If love have lent you twenty thousand tongues,
And every tongue more moving than your own,
Bewitching like the wanton mermaid's songs,
Yet from mine ear the tempting tune is blown
For know, my heart stands armed in mine ear,
And will not let a false sound enter there;

'Lest the deceiving harmony should run
Into the quiet closure of my breast;
And then my little heart were quite undone,
In his bedchamber to be barr'd of rest.
No, lady, no; my heart longs not to groan,
But soundly sleeps, while now it sleeps alone.

'What have you urged that I cannot reprove?
The path is smooth that leadeth on to danger:
I hate not love, but your device in love,
That lends embracements unto every stranger.
You do it for increase: O strange excuse,
When reason is the bawd to lust's abuse!

'Call it not love, for Love to heaven is fled,
Since sweating Lust on earth usurp'd his name;
Under whose simple semblance he hath fed
Upon fresh beauty, blotting it with blame;
Which the hot tyrant stains and soon bereaves,
As caterpillars do the tender leaves.

'Love comforteth like sunshine after rain,
But Lust's effect is tempest after sun;
Love's gentle spring doth always fresh remain,
Lust's winter comes ere summer half be done;
Love surfeits not, Lust like a glutton dies;
Love is all truth, Lust full of forged lies.

'More I could tell, but more I dare not say;
The text is old, the orator too green.
Therefore, in sadness, now I will away;
My face is full of shame, my heart of teen:
Mine ears, that to your wanton talk attended,
Do burn themselves for having so offended.'

With this, he breaketh from the sweet embrace,
Of those fair arms which bound him to her breast,
And homeward through the dark laund runs apace;
Leaves Love upon her back deeply distress'd.
Look, how a bright star shooteth from the sky,
So glides he in the night from Venus' eye.

Which after him she darts, as one on shore
Gazing upon a late-embarked friend,
Till the wild waves will have him seen no more,
Whose ridges with the meeting clouds contend:
So did the merciless and pitchy night
Fold in the object that did feed her sight.

Whereat amazed, as one that unaware
Hath dropp'd a precious jewel in the flood,
Or stonish'd as night-wanderers often are,
Their light blown out in some mistrustful wood,
Even so confounded in the dark she lay,
Having lost the fair discovery of her way.

And now she beats her heart, whereat it groans,
That all the neighbour caves, as seeming troubled,
Make verbal repetition of her moans;
Passion on passion deeply is redoubled:
'Ay me!' she cries, and twenty times 'Woe, woe!'
And twenty echoes twenty times cry so.

She marking them begins a wailing note
And sings extemporally a woeful ditty;
How love makes young men thrall and old men dote;
How love is wise in folly, foolish-witty:
Her heavy anthem still concludes in woe,
And still the choir of echoes answer so.

Her song was tedious and outwore the night,
For lovers' hours are long, though seeming short:
If pleased themselves, others, they think, delight
In such-like circumstance, with suchlike sport:
Their copious stories oftentimes begun
End without audience and are never done.

For who hath she to spend the night withal
But idle sounds resembling parasites,
Like shrill-tongued tapsters answering every call,
Soothing the humour of fantastic wits?
She says ''Tis so:' they answer all ''Tis so;'
And would say after her, if she said 'No.'

Lo, here the gentle lark, weary of rest,
From his moist cabinet mounts up on high,
And wakes the morning, from whose silver breast
The sun ariseth in his majesty;
Who doth the world so gloriously behold
That cedar-tops and hills seem burnish'd gold.

Venus salutes him with this fair good-morrow:
'O thou clear god, and patron of all light,
From whom each lamp and shining star doth borrow
The beauteous influence that makes him bright,
There lives a son that suck'd an earthly mother,
May lend thee light, as thou dost lend to other.'

This said, she hasteth to a myrtle grove,
Musing the morning is so much o'erworn,
And yet she hears no tidings of her love:
She hearkens for his hounds and for his horn:
Anon she hears them chant it lustily,
And all in haste she coasteth to the cry.

And as she runs, the bushes in the way
Some catch her by the neck, some kiss her face,
Some twine about her thigh to make her stay:
She wildly breaketh from their strict embrace,
Like a milch doe, whose swelling dugs do ache,
Hasting to feed her fawn hid in some brake.

By this, she hears the hounds are at a bay;
Whereat she starts, like one that spies an adder
Wreathed up in fatal folds just in his way,
The fear whereof doth make him shake and shudder;
Even so the timorous yelping of the hounds
Appals her senses and her spirit confounds.

For now she knows it is no gentle chase,
But the blunt boar, rough bear, or lion proud,
Because the cry remaineth in one place,
Where fearfully the dogs exclaim aloud:
Finding their enemy to be so curst,
They all strain courtesy who shall cope him first.

This dismal cry rings sadly in her ear,
Through which it enters to surprise her heart;
Who, overcome by doubt and bloodless fear,
With cold-pale weakness numbs each feeling part:
Like soldiers, when their captain once doth yield,
They basely fly and dare not stay the field.

Thus stands she in a trembling ecstasy;
Till, cheering up her senses all dismay'd,
She tells them 'tis a causeless fantasy,
And childish error, that they are afraid;
Bids them leave quaking, bids them fear no more:--
And with that word she spied the hunted boar,

Whose frothy mouth, bepainted all with red,
Like milk and blood being mingled both together,
A second fear through all her sinews spread,
Which madly hurries her she knows not whither:
This way runs, and now she will no further,
But back retires to rate the boar for murther.

A thousand spleens bear her a thousand ways;
She treads the path that she untreads again;
Her more than haste is mated with delays,
Like the proceedings of a drunken brain,
Full of respects, yet nought at all respecting;
In hand with all things, nought at all effecting.

Here kennell'd in a brake she finds a hound,
And asks the weary caitiff for his master,
And there another licking of his wound,
'Gainst venom'd sores the only sovereign plaster;
And here she meets another sadly scowling,
To whom she speaks, and he replies with howling.

When he hath ceased his ill-resounding noise,
Another flap-mouth'd mourner, black and grim,
Against the welkin volleys out his voice;
Another and another answer him,
Clapping their proud tails to the ground below,
Shaking their scratch'd ears, bleeding as they go.

Look, how the world's poor people are amazed
At apparitions, signs and prodigies,
Whereon with fearful eyes they long have gazed,
Infusing them with dreadful prophecies;
So she at these sad signs draws up her breath
And sighing it again, exclaims on Death.

'Hard-favour'd tyrant, ugly, meagre, lean,
Hateful divorce of love,'--thus chides she Death,--
'Grim-grinning ghost, earth's worm, what dost thou mean
To stifle beauty and to steal his breath,
Who when he lived, his breath and beauty set
Gloss on the rose, smell to the violet?

'If he be dead,--O no, it cannot be,
Seeing his beauty, thou shouldst strike at it:--
O yes, it may; thou hast no eyes to see,
But hatefully at random dost thou hit.
Thy mark is feeble age, but thy false dart
Mistakes that aim and cleaves an infant's heart.

'Hadst thou but bid beware, then he had spoke,
And, hearing him, thy power had lost his power.
The Destinies will curse thee for this stroke;
They bid thee crop a weed, thou pluck'st a flower:
Love's golden arrow at him should have fled,
And not Death's ebon dart, to strike dead.

'Dost thou drink tears, that thou provokest such weeping?
What may a heavy groan advantage thee?
Why hast thou cast into eternal sleeping
Those eyes that taught all other eyes to see?
Now Nature cares not for thy mortal vigour,
Since her best work is ruin'd with thy rigour.'

Here overcome, as one full of despair,
She vail'd her eyelids, who, like sluices, stopt
The crystal tide that from her two cheeks fair
In the sweet channel of her bosom dropt;
But through the flood-gates breaks the silver rain,
And with his strong course opens them again.

O, how her eyes and tears did lend and borrow!
Her eyes seen in the tears, tears in her eye;
Both crystals, where they view'd each other's sorrow,
Sorrow that friendly sighs sought still to dry;
But like a stormy day, now wind, now rain,
Sighs dry her cheeks, tears make them wet again.

Variable passions throng her constant woe,
As striving who should best become her grief;
All entertain'd, each passion labours so,
That every present sorrow seemeth chief,
But none is best: then join they all together,
Like many clouds consulting for foul weather.

By this, far off she hears some huntsman hollo;
A nurse's song ne'er pleased her babe so well:
The dire imagination she did follow
This sound of hope doth labour to expel;
For now reviving joy bids her rejoice,
And flatters her it is Adonis' voice.

Whereat her tears began to turn their tide,
Being prison'd in her eye like pearls in glass;
Yet sometimes falls an orient drop beside,
Which her cheek melts, as scorning it should pass,
To wash the foul face of the sluttish ground,
Who is but drunken when she seemeth drown'd.

O hard-believing love, how strange it seems
Not to believe, and yet too credulous!
Thy weal and woe are both of them extremes;
Despair and hope makes thee ridiculous:
The one doth flatter thee in thoughts unlikely,
In likely thoughts the other kills thee quickly.

Now she unweaves the web that she hath wrought;
Adonis lives, and Death is not to blame;
It was not she that call'd him, all-to naught:
Now she adds honours to his hateful name;
She clepes him king of graves and grave for kings,
Imperious supreme of all mortal things.

'No, no,' quoth she, 'sweet Death, I did but jest;
Yet pardon me I felt a kind of fear
When as I met the boar, that bloody beast,
Which knows no pity, but is still severe;
Then, gentle shadow,--truth I must confess,--
I rail'd on thee, fearing my love's decease.

''Tis not my fault: the boar provoked my tongue;
Be wreak'd on him, invisible commander;
'Tis he, foul creature, that hath done thee wrong;
I did but act, he's author of thy slander:
Grief hath two tongues, and never woman yet
Could rule them both without ten women's wit.'

Thus hoping that Adonis is alive,
Her rash suspect she doth extenuate;
And that his beauty may the better thrive,
With Death she humbly doth insinuate;
Tells him of trophies, statues, tombs, and stories
His victories, his triumphs and his glories.

'O Jove,' quoth she, 'how much a fool was I
To be of such a weak and silly mind
To wail his death who lives and must not die
Till mutual overthrow of mortal kind!
For he being dead, with him is beauty slain,
And, beauty dead, black chaos comes again.

'Fie, fie, fond love, thou art so full of fear
As one with treasure laden, hemm'd thieves;
Trifles, unwitnessed with eye or ear,
Thy coward heart with false bethinking grieves.'
Even at this word she hears a merry horn,
Whereat she leaps that was but late forlorn.

As falcon to the lure, away she flies;
The grass stoops not, she treads on it so light;
And in her haste unfortunately spies
The foul boar's conquest on her fair delight;
Which seen, her eyes, as murder'd with the view,
Like stars ashamed of day, themselves withdrew;

Or, as the snail, whose tender horns being hit,
Shrinks backward in his shelly cave with pain,
And there, all smother'd up, in shade doth sit,
Long after fearing to creep forth again;
So, at his bloody view, her eyes are fled
Into the deep dark cabins of her head:

Where they resign their office and their light
To the disposing of her troubled brain;
Who bids them still consort with ugly night,
And never wound the heart with looks again;
Who like a king perplexed in his throne,
By their suggestion gives a deadly groan,

Whereat each tributary subject quakes;
As when the wind, imprison'd in the ground,
Struggling for passage, earth's foundation shakes,
Which with cold terror doth men's minds confound.
This mutiny each part doth so surprise
That from their dark beds once more leap her eyes;

And, being open'd, threw unwilling light
Upon the wide wound that the boar had trench'd
In his soft flank; whose wonted lily white
With purple tears, that his wound wept, was drench'd:
No flower was nigh, no grass, herb, leaf, or weed,
But stole his blood and seem'd with him to bleed.

This solemn sympathy poor Venus noteth;
Over one shoulder doth she hang her head;
Dumbly she passions, franticly she doteth;
She thinks he could not die, he is not dead:
Her voice is stopt, her joints forget to bow;
Her eyes are mad that they have wept til now.

Upon his hurt she looks so steadfastly,
That her sight dazzling makes the wound seem three;
And then she reprehends her mangling eye,
That makes more gashes where no breach should be:
His face seems twain, each several limb is doubled;
For oft the eye mistakes, the brain being troubled.

'My tongue cannot express my grief for one,
And yet,' quoth she, 'behold two Adons dead!
My sighs are blown away, my salt tears gone,
Mine eyes are turn'd to fire, my heart to lead:
Heavy heart's lead, melt at mine eyes' red fire!
So shall I die by drops of hot desire.

'Alas, poor world, what treasure hast thou lost!
What face remains alive that's worth the viewing?
Whose tongue is music now? what canst thou boast
Of things long since, or any thing ensuing?
The flowers are sweet, their colours fresh and trim;
But true-sweet beauty lived and died with him.

'Bonnet nor veil henceforth no creature wear!
Nor sun nor wind will ever strive to kiss you:
Having no fair to lose, you need not fear;
The sun doth scorn you and the wind doth hiss you:
But when Adonis lived, sun and sharp air
Lurk'd like two thieves, to rob him of his fair:

'And therefore would he put his bonnet on,
Under whose brim the gaudy sun would peep;
The wind would blow it off and, being gone,
Play with his locks: then would Adonis weep;
And straight, in pity of his tender years,
They both would strive who first should dry his tears.

'To see his face the lion walk'd along
Behind some hedge, because he would not fear him;
To recreate himself when he hath sung,
The tiger would be tame and gently hear him;
If he had spoke, the wolf would leave his prey
And never fright the silly lamb that day.

'When he beheld his shadow in the brook,
The fishes spread on it their golden gills;
When he was by, the birds such pleasure took,
That some would sing, some other in their bills
Would bring him mulberries and ripe-red cherries;
He fed them with his sight, they him with berries.

'But this foul, grim, and urchin-snouted boar,
Whose downward eye still looketh for a grave,
Ne'er saw the beauteous livery that he wore;
Witness the entertainment that he gave:
If he did see his face, why then I know
He thought to kiss him, and hath kill'd him so.

''Tis true, 'tis true; thus was Adonis slain:
He ran upon the boar with his sharp spear,
Who did not whet his teeth at him again,
But by a kiss thought to persuade him there;
And nuzzling in his flank, the loving swine
Sheathed unaware the tusk in his soft groin.

'Had I been tooth'd like him, I must confess,
With kissing him I should have kill'd him first;
But he is dead, and never did he bless
My youth with his; the more am I accurst.'
With this, she falleth in the place she stood,
And stains her face with his congealed blood.

She looks upon his lips, and they are pale;
She takes him by the hand, and that is cold;
She whispers in his ears a heavy tale,
As if they heard the woeful words she told;
She lifts the coffer-lids that close his eyes,
Where, lo, two lamps, burnt out, in darkness lies;

Two glasses, where herself herself beheld
A thousand times, and now no more reflect;
Their virtue lost, wherein they late excell'd,
And every beauty robb'd of his effect:
'Wonder of time,' quoth she, 'this is my spite,
That, thou being dead, the day should yet be light.

'Since thou art dead, lo, here I prophesy:
Sorrow on love hereafter shall attend:
It shall be waited on with jealousy,
Find sweet beginning, but unsavoury end,
Ne'er settled equally, but high or low,
That all love's pleasure shall not match his woe.

'It shall be fickle, false and full of fraud,
Bud and be blasted in a breathing-while;
The bottom poison, and the top o'erstraw'd
With sweets that shall the truest sight beguile:
The strongest body shall it make most weak,
Strike the wise dumb and teach the fool to speak.

'It shall be sparing and too full of riot,
Teaching decrepit age to tread the measures;
The staring ruffian shall it keep in quiet,
Pluck down the rich, enrich the poor with treasures;
It shall be raging-mad and silly-mild,
Make the young old, the old become a child.

'It shall suspect where is no cause of fear;
It shall not fear where it should most mistrust;
It shall be merciful and too severe,
And most deceiving when it seems most just;
Perverse it shall be where it shows most toward,
Put fear to valour, courage to the coward.

'It shall be cause of war and dire events,
And set dissension 'twixt the son and sire;
Subject and servile to all discontents,
As dry combustious matter is to fire:
Sith in his prime Death doth my love destroy,
They that love best their loves shall not enjoy.'

By this, the boy that by her side lay kill'd
Was melted like a vapour from her sight,
And in his blood that on the ground lay spill'd,
A purple flower sprung up, chequer'd with white,
Resembling well his pale cheeks and the blood
Which in round drops upon their whiteness stood.

She bows her head, the new-sprung flower to smell,
Comparing it to her Adonis' breath,
And says, within her bosom it shall dwell,
Since he himself is reft from her by death:
She crops the stalk, and in the breach appears
Green dropping sap, which she compares to tears.

'Poor flower,' quoth she, 'this was thy fathers guise--
Sweet issue of a more sweet-smelling sire--
For every little grief to wet his eyes:
To grow unto himself was his desire,
And so 'tis thine; but know, it is as good
To wither in my breast as in his blood.

'Here was thy father's bed, here in my breast;
Thou art the next of blood, and 'tis thy right:
Lo, in this hollow cradle take thy rest,
My throbbing heart shall rock thee day and night:
There shall not be one minute in an hour
Wherein I will not kiss my sweet love's flower.'

Thus weary of the world, away she hies,
And yokes her silver doves; by whose swift aid
Their mistress mounted through the empty skies
In her light chariot quickly is convey'd;
Holding their course to Paphos, where their queen
Means to immure herself and not be seen.


	THE WINTER'S TALE


	DRAMATIS PERSONAE


LEONTES	king of Sicilia.

MAMILLIUS	young prince of Sicilia.


CAMILLO	|
	|
ANTIGONUS	|
	|  Four Lords of Sicilia.
CLEOMENES	|
	|
DION	|


POLIXENES	King of Bohemia.

FLORIZEL	Prince of Bohemia.

ARCHIDAMUS	a Lord of Bohemia.

Old Shepherd	reputed father of Perdita. (Shepherd:)

Clown	his son.

AUTOLYCUS	a rogue.

	A Mariner. (Mariner:)

	A Gaoler.  (Gaoler:)

HERMIONE	queen to Leontes.

PERDITA	daughter to Leontes and Hermione.

PAULINA	wife to Antigonus.

EMILIA	a lady attending on Hermione,


MOPSA	|
	|  Shepherdesses.
DORCAS	|


	Other Lords and Gentlemen, Ladies, Officers,
	and Servants, Shepherds, and Shepherdesses.
	(First Lord:)
	(Gentleman:)
	(First Gentleman:)
	(Second Gentleman:)
	(Third Gentleman:)
	(First Lady:)
	(Second Lady:)
	(Officer:)
	(Servant:)
	(First Servant:)
	(Second Servant:)

Time	as Chorus.


SCENE	Sicilia, and Bohemia.




	THE WINTER'S TALE


ACT I



SCENE I	Antechamber in LEONTES' palace.



	[Enter CAMILLO and ARCHIDAMUS]

ARCHIDAMUS	If you shall chance, Camillo, to visit Bohemia, on
	the like occasion whereon my services are now on
	foot, you shall see, as I have said, great
	difference betwixt our Bohemia and your Sicilia.

CAMILLO	I think, this coming summer, the King of Sicilia
	means to pay Bohemia the visitation which he justly owes him.

ARCHIDAMUS	Wherein our entertainment shall shame us we will be
	justified in our loves; for indeed--

CAMILLO	Beseech you,--

ARCHIDAMUS	Verily, I speak it in the freedom of my knowledge:
	we cannot with such magnificence--in so rare--I know
	not what to say. We will give you sleepy drinks,
	that your senses, unintelligent of our insufficience,
	may, though they cannot praise us, as little accuse
	us.

CAMILLO	You pay a great deal too dear for what's given freely.

ARCHIDAMUS	Believe me, I speak as my understanding instructs me
	and as mine honesty puts it to utterance.

CAMILLO	Sicilia cannot show himself over-kind to Bohemia.
	They were trained together in their childhoods; and
	there rooted betwixt them then such an affection,
	which cannot choose but branch now. Since their
	more mature dignities and royal necessities made
	separation of their society, their encounters,
	though not personal, have been royally attorneyed
	with interchange of gifts, letters, loving
	embassies; that they have seemed to be together,
	though absent, shook hands, as over a vast, and
	embraced, as it were, from the ends of opposed
	winds. The heavens continue their loves!

ARCHIDAMUS	I think there is not in the world either malice or
	matter to alter it. You have an unspeakable
	comfort of your young prince Mamillius: it is a
	gentleman of the greatest promise that ever came
	into my note.

CAMILLO	I very well agree with you in the hopes of him: it
	is a gallant child; one that indeed physics the
	subject, makes old hearts fresh: they that went on
	crutches ere he was born desire yet their life to
	see him a man.

ARCHIDAMUS	Would they else be content to die?

CAMILLO	Yes; if there were no other excuse why they should
	desire to live.

ARCHIDAMUS	If the king had no son, they would desire to live
	on crutches till he had one.

	[Exeunt]




	THE WINTER'S TALE


ACT I



SCENE II	A room of state in the same.



	[Enter LEONTES, HERMIONE, MAMILLIUS,
	POLIXENES, CAMILLO, and Attendants]

POLIXENES	Nine changes of the watery star hath been
	The shepherd's note since we have left our throne
	Without a burthen: time as long again
	Would be find up, my brother, with our thanks;
	And yet we should, for perpetuity,
	Go hence in debt: and therefore, like a cipher,
	Yet standing in rich place, I multiply
	With one 'We thank you' many thousands moe
	That go before it.

LEONTES	                  Stay your thanks a while;
	And pay them when you part.

POLIXENES	Sir, that's to-morrow.
	I am question'd by my fears, of what may chance
	Or breed upon our absence; that may blow
	No sneaping winds at home, to make us say
	'This is put forth too truly:' besides, I have stay'd
	To tire your royalty.

LEONTES	We are tougher, brother,
	Than you can put us to't.

POLIXENES	No longer stay.

LEONTES	One seven-night longer.

POLIXENES	Very sooth, to-morrow.

LEONTES	We'll part the time between's then; and in that
	I'll no gainsaying.

POLIXENES	Press me not, beseech you, so.
	There is no tongue that moves, none, none i' the world,
	So soon as yours could win me: so it should now,
	Were there necessity in your request, although
	'Twere needful I denied it. My affairs
	Do even drag me homeward: which to hinder
	Were in your love a whip to me; my stay
	To you a charge and trouble: to save both,
	Farewell, our brother.

LEONTES	Tongue-tied, our queen?
	speak you.

HERMIONE	I had thought, sir, to have held my peace until
	You have drawn oaths from him not to stay. You, sir,
	Charge him too coldly. Tell him, you are sure
	All in Bohemia's well; this satisfaction
	The by-gone day proclaim'd: say this to him,
	He's beat from his best ward.

LEONTES	Well said, Hermione.

HERMIONE	To tell, he longs to see his son, were strong:
	But let him say so then, and let him go;
	But let him swear so, and he shall not stay,
	We'll thwack him hence with distaffs.
	Yet of your royal presence I'll adventure
	The borrow of a week. When at Bohemia
	You take my lord, I'll give him my commission
	To let him there a month behind the gest
	Prefix'd for's parting: yet, good deed, Leontes,
	I love thee not a jar o' the clock behind
	What lady-she her lord. You'll stay?

POLIXENES	No, madam.

HERMIONE	Nay, but you will?

POLIXENES	                  I may not, verily.

HERMIONE	Verily!
	You put me off with limber vows; but I,
	Though you would seek to unsphere the
	stars with oaths,
	Should yet say 'Sir, no going.' Verily,
	You shall not go: a lady's 'Verily' 's
	As potent as a lord's. Will you go yet?
	Force me to keep you as a prisoner,
	Not like a guest; so you shall pay your fees
	When you depart, and save your thanks. How say you?
	My prisoner? or my guest? by your dread 'Verily,'
	One of them you shall be.

POLIXENES	Your guest, then, madam:
	To be your prisoner should import offending;
	Which is for me less easy to commit
	Than you to punish.

HERMIONE	Not your gaoler, then,
	But your kind hostess. Come, I'll question you
	Of my lord's tricks and yours when you were boys:
	You were pretty lordings then?

POLIXENES	We were, fair queen,
	Two lads that thought there was no more behind
	But such a day to-morrow as to-day,
	And to be boy eternal.

HERMIONE	Was not my lord
	The verier wag o' the two?

POLIXENES	We were as twinn'd lambs that did frisk i' the sun,
	And bleat the one at the other: what we changed
	Was innocence for innocence; we knew not
	The doctrine of ill-doing, nor dream'd
	That any did. Had we pursued that life,
	And our weak spirits ne'er been higher rear'd
	With stronger blood, we should have answer'd heaven
	Boldly 'not guilty;' the imposition clear'd
	Hereditary ours.

HERMIONE	                  By this we gather
	You have tripp'd since.

POLIXENES	O my most sacred lady!
	Temptations have since then been born to's; for
	In those unfledged days was my wife a girl;
	Your precious self had then not cross'd the eyes
	Of my young play-fellow.

HERMIONE	Grace to boot!
	Of this make no conclusion, lest you say
	Your queen and I are devils: yet go on;
	The offences we have made you do we'll answer,
	If you first sinn'd with us and that with us
	You did continue fault and that you slipp'd not
	With any but with us.

LEONTES	Is he won yet?

HERMIONE	He'll stay my lord.

LEONTES	At my request he would not.
	Hermione, my dearest, thou never spokest
	To better purpose.

HERMIONE	                                 Never?

LEONTES	Never, but once.

HERMIONE	What! have I twice said well? when was't before?
	I prithee tell me; cram's with praise, and make's
	As fat as tame things: one good deed dying tongueless
	Slaughters a thousand waiting upon that.
	Our praises are our wages: you may ride's
	With one soft kiss a thousand furlongs ere
	With spur we beat an acre. But to the goal:
	My last good deed was to entreat his stay:
	What was my first? it has an elder sister,
	Or I mistake you: O, would her name were Grace!
	But once before I spoke to the purpose: when?
	Nay, let me have't; I long.

LEONTES	Why, that was when
	Three crabbed months had sour'd themselves to death,
	Ere I could make thee open thy white hand
	And clap thyself my love: then didst thou utter
	'I am yours for ever.'

HERMIONE	'Tis grace indeed.
	Why, lo you now, I have spoke to the purpose twice:
	The one for ever earn'd a royal husband;
	The other for some while a friend.

LEONTES	[Aside]	Too hot, too hot!
	To mingle friendship far is mingling bloods.
	I have tremor cordis on me: my heart dances;
	But not for joy; not joy. This entertainment
	May a free face put on, derive a liberty
	From heartiness, from bounty, fertile bosom,
	And well become the agent; 't may, I grant;
	But to be paddling palms and pinching fingers,
	As now they are, and making practised smiles,
	As in a looking-glass, and then to sigh, as 'twere
	The mort o' the deer; O, that is entertainment
	My bosom likes not, nor my brows! Mamillius,
	Art thou my boy?

MAMILLIUS	                           Ay, my good lord.

LEONTES	I' fecks!
	Why, that's my bawcock. What, hast
	smutch'd thy nose?
	They say it is a copy out of mine. Come, captain,
	We must be neat; not neat, but cleanly, captain:
	And yet the steer, the heifer and the calf
	Are all call'd neat.--Still virginalling
	Upon his palm!--How now, you wanton calf!
	Art thou my calf?

MAMILLIUS	                  Yes, if you will, my lord.

LEONTES	Thou want'st a rough pash and the shoots that I have,
	To be full like me: yet they say we are
	Almost as like as eggs; women say so,
	That will say anything but were they false
	As o'er-dyed blacks, as wind, as waters, false
	As dice are to be wish'd by one that fixes
	No bourn 'twixt his and mine, yet were it true
	To say this boy were like me. Come, sir page,
	Look on me with your welkin eye: sweet villain!
	Most dear'st! my collop! Can thy dam?--may't be?--
	Affection! thy intention stabs the centre:
	Thou dost make possible things not so held,
	Communicatest with dreams;--how can this be?--
	With what's unreal thou coactive art,
	And fellow'st nothing: then 'tis very credent
	Thou mayst co-join with something; and thou dost,
	And that beyond commission, and I find it,
	And that to the infection of my brains
	And hardening of my brows.

POLIXENES	What means Sicilia?

HERMIONE	He something seems unsettled.

POLIXENES	How, my lord!
	What cheer? how is't with you, best brother?

HERMIONE	You look as if you held a brow of much distraction
	Are you moved, my lord?

LEONTES	No, in good earnest.
	How sometimes nature will betray its folly,
	Its tenderness, and make itself a pastime
	To harder bosoms! Looking on the lines
	Of my boy's face, methoughts I did recoil
	Twenty-three years, and saw myself unbreech'd,
	In my green velvet coat, my dagger muzzled,
	Lest it should bite its master, and so prove,
	As ornaments oft do, too dangerous:
	How like, methought, I then was to this kernel,
	This squash, this gentleman. Mine honest friend,
	Will you take eggs for money?

MAMILLIUS	No, my lord, I'll fight.

LEONTES	You will! why, happy man be's dole! My brother,
	Are you so fond of your young prince as we
	Do seem to be of ours?

POLIXENES	If at home, sir,
	He's all my exercise, my mirth, my matter,
	Now my sworn friend and then mine enemy,
	My parasite, my soldier, statesman, all:
	He makes a July's day short as December,
	And with his varying childness cures in me
	Thoughts that would thick my blood.

LEONTES	So stands this squire
	Officed with me: we two will walk, my lord,
	And leave you to your graver steps. Hermione,
	How thou lovest us, show in our brother's welcome;
	Let what is dear in Sicily be cheap:
	Next to thyself and my young rover, he's
	Apparent to my heart.

HERMIONE	If you would seek us,
	We are yours i' the garden: shall's attend you there?

LEONTES	To your own bents dispose you: you'll be found,
	Be you beneath the sky.

	[Aside]

		  I am angling now,
	Though you perceive me not how I give line.
	Go to, go to!
	How she holds up the neb, the bill to him!
	And arms her with the boldness of a wife
	To her allowing husband!

	[Exeunt POLIXENES, HERMIONE, and Attendants]

		   Gone already!
	Inch-thick, knee-deep, o'er head and
	ears a fork'd one!
	Go, play, boy, play: thy mother plays, and I
	Play too, but so disgraced a part, whose issue
	Will hiss me to my grave: contempt and clamour
	Will be my knell. Go, play, boy, play.
	There have been,
	Or I am much deceived, cuckolds ere now;
	And many a man there is, even at this present,
	Now while I speak this, holds his wife by the arm,
	That little thinks she has been sluiced in's absence
	And his pond fish'd by his next neighbour, by
	Sir Smile, his neighbour: nay, there's comfort in't
	Whiles other men have gates and those gates open'd,
	As mine, against their will. Should all despair
	That have revolted wives, the tenth of mankind
	Would hang themselves. Physic for't there is none;
	It is a bawdy planet, that will strike
	Where 'tis predominant; and 'tis powerful, think it,
	From east, west, north and south: be it concluded,
	No barricado for a belly; know't;
	It will let in and out the enemy
	With bag and baggage: many thousand on's
	Have the disease, and feel't not. How now, boy!

MAMILLIUS	I am like you, they say.

LEONTES	Why that's some comfort. What, Camillo there?

CAMILLO	Ay, my good lord.

LEONTES	Go play, Mamillius; thou'rt an honest man.

	[Exit MAMILLIUS]

	Camillo, this great sir will yet stay longer.

CAMILLO	You had much ado to make his anchor hold:
	When you cast out, it still came home.

LEONTES	Didst note it?

CAMILLO	He would not stay at your petitions: made
	His business more material.

LEONTES	Didst perceive it?

	[Aside]

	They're here with me already, whispering, rounding
	'Sicilia is a so-forth:' 'tis far gone,
	When I shall gust it last. How came't, Camillo,
	That he did stay?

CAMILLO	                  At the good queen's entreaty.

LEONTES	At the queen's be't: 'good' should be pertinent
	But, so it is, it is not. Was this taken
	By any understanding pate but thine?
	For thy conceit is soaking, will draw in
	More than the common blocks: not noted, is't,
	But of the finer natures? by some severals
	Of head-piece extraordinary? lower messes
	Perchance are to this business purblind? say.

CAMILLO	Business, my lord! I think most understand
	Bohemia stays here longer.

LEONTES	Ha!

CAMILLO	Stays here longer.

LEONTES	Ay, but why?

CAMILLO	To satisfy your highness and the entreaties
	Of our most gracious mistress.

LEONTES	Satisfy!
	The entreaties of your mistress! satisfy!
	Let that suffice. I have trusted thee, Camillo,
	With all the nearest things to my heart, as well
	My chamber-councils, wherein, priest-like, thou
	Hast cleansed my bosom, I from thee departed
	Thy penitent reform'd: but we have been
	Deceived in thy integrity, deceived
	In that which seems so.

CAMILLO	Be it forbid, my lord!

LEONTES	To bide upon't, thou art not honest, or,
	If thou inclinest that way, thou art a coward,
	Which hoxes honesty behind, restraining
	From course required; or else thou must be counted
	A servant grafted in my serious trust
	And therein negligent; or else a fool
	That seest a game play'd home, the rich stake drawn,
	And takest it all for jest.

CAMILLO	My gracious lord,
	I may be negligent, foolish and fearful;
	In every one of these no man is free,
	But that his negligence, his folly, fear,
	Among the infinite doings of the world,
	Sometime puts forth. In your affairs, my lord,
	If ever I were wilful-negligent,
	It was my folly; if industriously
	I play'd the fool, it was my negligence,
	Not weighing well the end; if ever fearful
	To do a thing, where I the issue doubted,
	Where of the execution did cry out
	Against the non-performance, 'twas a fear
	Which oft infects the wisest: these, my lord,
	Are such allow'd infirmities that honesty
	Is never free of. But, beseech your grace,
	Be plainer with me; let me know my trespass
	By its own visage: if I then deny it,
	'Tis none of mine.

LEONTES	                  Ha' not you seen, Camillo,--
	But that's past doubt, you have, or your eye-glass
	Is thicker than a cuckold's horn,--or heard,--
	For to a vision so apparent rumour
	Cannot be mute,--or thought,--for cogitation
	Resides not in that man that does not think,--
	My wife is slippery? If thou wilt confess,
	Or else be impudently negative,
	To have nor eyes nor ears nor thought, then say
	My wife's a hobby-horse, deserves a name
	As rank as any flax-wench that puts to
	Before her troth-plight: say't and justify't.

CAMILLO	I would not be a stander-by to hear
	My sovereign mistress clouded so, without
	My present vengeance taken: 'shrew my heart,
	You never spoke what did become you less
	Than this; which to reiterate were sin
	As deep as that, though true.

LEONTES	Is whispering nothing?
	Is leaning cheek to cheek? is meeting noses?
	Kissing with inside lip? stopping the career
	Of laughing with a sigh?--a note infallible
	Of breaking honesty--horsing foot on foot?
	Skulking in corners? wishing clocks more swift?
	Hours, minutes? noon, midnight? and all eyes
	Blind with the pin and web but theirs, theirs only,
	That would unseen be wicked? is this nothing?
	Why, then the world and all that's in't is nothing;
	The covering sky is nothing; Bohemia nothing;
	My wife is nothing; nor nothing have these nothings,
	If this be nothing.

CAMILLO	Good my lord, be cured
	Of this diseased opinion, and betimes;
	For 'tis most dangerous.

LEONTES	Say it be, 'tis true.

CAMILLO	No, no, my lord.

LEONTES	                  It is; you lie, you lie:
	I say thou liest, Camillo, and I hate thee,
	Pronounce thee a gross lout, a mindless slave,
	Or else a hovering temporizer, that
	Canst with thine eyes at once see good and evil,
	Inclining to them both: were my wife's liver
	Infected as her life, she would not live
	The running of one glass.

CAMILLO	Who does infect her?

LEONTES	Why, he that wears her like a medal, hanging
	About his neck, Bohemia: who, if I
	Had servants true about me, that bare eyes
	To see alike mine honour as their profits,
	Their own particular thrifts, they would do that
	Which should undo more doing: ay, and thou,
	His cupbearer,--whom I from meaner form
	Have benched and reared to worship, who mayst see
	Plainly as heaven sees earth and earth sees heaven,
	How I am galled,--mightst bespice a cup,
	To give mine enemy a lasting wink;
	Which draught to me were cordial.

CAMILLO	Sir, my lord,
	I could do this, and that with no rash potion,
	But with a lingering dram that should not work
	Maliciously like poison: but I cannot
	Believe this crack to be in my dread mistress,
	So sovereignly being honourable.
	I have loved thee,--

LEONTES	Make that thy question, and go rot!
	Dost think I am so muddy, so unsettled,
	To appoint myself in this vexation, sully
	The purity and whiteness of my sheets,
	Which to preserve is sleep, which being spotted
	Is goads, thorns, nettles, tails of wasps,
	Give scandal to the blood o' the prince my son,
	Who I do think is mine and love as mine,
	Without ripe moving to't? Would I do this?
	Could man so blench?

CAMILLO	I must believe you, sir:
	I do; and will fetch off Bohemia for't;
	Provided that, when he's removed, your highness
	Will take again your queen as yours at first,
	Even for your son's sake; and thereby for sealing
	The injury of tongues in courts and kingdoms
	Known and allied to yours.

LEONTES	Thou dost advise me
	Even so as I mine own course have set down:
	I'll give no blemish to her honour, none.

CAMILLO	My lord,
	Go then; and with a countenance as clear
	As friendship wears at feasts, keep with Bohemia
	And with your queen. I am his cupbearer:
	If from me he have wholesome beverage,
	Account me not your servant.

LEONTES	This is all:
	Do't and thou hast the one half of my heart;
	Do't not, thou split'st thine own.

CAMILLO	I'll do't, my lord.

LEONTES	I will seem friendly, as thou hast advised me.

	[Exit]

CAMILLO	O miserable lady! But, for me,
	What case stand I in? I must be the poisoner
	Of good Polixenes; and my ground to do't
	Is the obedience to a master, one
	Who in rebellion with himself will have
	All that are his so too. To do this deed,
	Promotion follows. If I could find example
	Of thousands that had struck anointed kings
	And flourish'd after, I'ld not do't; but since
	Nor brass nor stone nor parchment bears not one,
	Let villany itself forswear't. I must
	Forsake the court: to do't, or no, is certain
	To me a break-neck. Happy star, reign now!
	Here comes Bohemia.

	[Re-enter POLIXENES]

POLIXENES	This is strange: methinks
	My favour here begins to warp. Not speak?
	Good day, Camillo.

CAMILLO	                  Hail, most royal sir!

POLIXENES	What is the news i' the court?

CAMILLO	None rare, my lord.

POLIXENES	The king hath on him such a countenance
	As he had lost some province and a region
	Loved as he loves himself: even now I met him
	With customary compliment; when he,
	Wafting his eyes to the contrary and falling
	A lip of much contempt, speeds from me and
	So leaves me to consider what is breeding
	That changeth thus his manners.

CAMILLO	I dare not know, my lord.

POLIXENES	How! dare not! do not. Do you know, and dare not?
	Be intelligent to me: 'tis thereabouts;
	For, to yourself, what you do know, you must.
	And cannot say, you dare not. Good Camillo,
	Your changed complexions are to me a mirror
	Which shows me mine changed too; for I must be
	A party in this alteration, finding
	Myself thus alter'd with 't.

CAMILLO	There is a sickness
	Which puts some of us in distemper, but
	I cannot name the disease; and it is caught
	Of you that yet are well.

POLIXENES	How! caught of me!
	Make me not sighted like the basilisk:
	I have look'd on thousands, who have sped the better
	By my regard, but kill'd none so. Camillo,--
	As you are certainly a gentleman, thereto
	Clerk-like experienced, which no less adorns
	Our gentry than our parents' noble names,
	In whose success we are gentle,--I beseech you,
	If you know aught which does behove my knowledge
	Thereof to be inform'd, imprison't not
	In ignorant concealment.

CAMILLO	I may not answer.

POLIXENES	A sickness caught of me, and yet I well!
	I must be answer'd. Dost thou hear, Camillo,
	I conjure thee, by all the parts of man
	Which honour does acknowledge, whereof the least
	Is not this suit of mine, that thou declare
	What incidency thou dost guess of harm
	Is creeping toward me; how far off, how near;
	Which way to be prevented, if to be;
	If not, how best to bear it.

CAMILLO	Sir, I will tell you;
	Since I am charged in honour and by him
	That I think honourable: therefore mark my counsel,
	Which must be even as swiftly follow'd as
	I mean to utter it, or both yourself and me
	Cry lost, and so good night!

POLIXENES	On, good Camillo.

CAMILLO	I am appointed him to murder you.

POLIXENES	By whom, Camillo?

CAMILLO	                        By the king.

POLIXENES	For what?

CAMILLO	He thinks, nay, with all confidence he swears,
	As he had seen't or been an instrument
	To vice you to't, that you have touch'd his queen
	Forbiddenly.

POLIXENES	                  O, then my best blood turn
	To an infected jelly and my name
	Be yoked with his that did betray the Best!
	Turn then my freshest reputation to
	A savour that may strike the dullest nostril
	Where I arrive, and my approach be shunn'd,
	Nay, hated too, worse than the great'st infection
	That e'er was heard or read!

CAMILLO	Swear his thought over
	By each particular star in heaven and
	By all their influences, you may as well
	Forbid the sea for to obey the moon
	As or by oath remove or counsel shake
	The fabric of his folly, whose foundation
	Is piled upon his faith and will continue
	The standing of his body.

POLIXENES	How should this grow?

CAMILLO	I know not: but I am sure 'tis safer to
	Avoid what's grown than question how 'tis born.
	If therefore you dare trust my honesty,
	That lies enclosed in this trunk which you
	Shall bear along impawn'd, away to-night!
	Your followers I will whisper to the business,
	And will by twos and threes at several posterns
	Clear them o' the city. For myself, I'll put
	My fortunes to your service, which are here
	By this discovery lost. Be not uncertain;
	For, by the honour of my parents, I
	Have utter'd truth: which if you seek to prove,
	I dare not stand by; nor shall you be safer
	Than one condemn'd by the king's own mouth, thereon
	His execution sworn.

POLIXENES	I do believe thee:
	I saw his heart in 's face. Give me thy hand:
	Be pilot to me and thy places shall
	Still neighbour mine. My ships are ready and
	My people did expect my hence departure
	Two days ago. This jealousy
	Is for a precious creature: as she's rare,
	Must it be great, and as his person's mighty,
	Must it be violent, and as he does conceive
	He is dishonour'd by a man which ever
	Profess'd to him, why, his revenges must
	In that be made more bitter. Fear o'ershades me:
	Good expedition be my friend, and comfort
	The gracious queen, part of his theme, but nothing
	Of his ill-ta'en suspicion! Come, Camillo;
	I will respect thee as a father if
	Thou bear'st my life off hence: let us avoid.

CAMILLO	It is in mine authority to command
	The keys of all the posterns: please your highness
	To take the urgent hour. Come, sir, away.

	[Exeunt]




	THE WINTER'S TALE


ACT II



SCENE I	A room in LEONTES' palace.


	[Enter HERMIONE, MAMILLIUS, and Ladies]

HERMIONE	Take the boy to you: he so troubles me,
	'Tis past enduring.

First Lady	Come, my gracious lord,
	Shall I be your playfellow?

MAMILLIUS	No, I'll none of you.

First Lady	Why, my sweet lord?

MAMILLIUS	You'll kiss me hard and speak to me as if
	I were a baby still. I love you better.

Second Lady	And why so, my lord?

MAMILLIUS	Not for because
	Your brows are blacker; yet black brows, they say,
	Become some women best, so that there be not
	Too much hair there, but in a semicircle
	Or a half-moon made with a pen.

Second Lady	Who taught you this?

MAMILLIUS	I learnt it out of women's faces. Pray now
	What colour are your eyebrows?

First Lady	Blue, my lord.

MAMILLIUS	Nay, that's a mock: I have seen a lady's nose
	That has been blue, but not her eyebrows.

First Lady	Hark ye;
	The queen your mother rounds apace: we shall
	Present our services to a fine new prince
	One of these days; and then you'ld wanton with us,
	If we would have you.

Second Lady	She is spread of late
	Into a goodly bulk: good time encounter her!

HERMIONE	What wisdom stirs amongst you? Come, sir, now
	I am for you again: pray you, sit by us,
	And tell 's a tale.

MAMILLIUS	Merry or sad shall't be?

HERMIONE	As merry as you will.

MAMILLIUS	A sad tale's best for winter: I have one
	Of sprites and goblins.

HERMIONE	Let's have that, good sir.
	Come on, sit down: come on, and do your best
	To fright me with your sprites; you're powerful at it.

MAMILLIUS	There was a man--

HERMIONE	                  Nay, come, sit down; then on.

MAMILLIUS	Dwelt by a churchyard: I will tell it softly;
	Yond crickets shall not hear it.

HERMIONE	Come on, then,
	And give't me in mine ear.

	[Enter LEONTES, with ANTIGONUS, Lords and others]

LEONTES	Was he met there? his train? Camillo with him?

First Lord	Behind the tuft of pines I met them; never
	Saw I men scour so on their way: I eyed them
	Even to their ships.

LEONTES	How blest am I
	In my just censure, in my true opinion!
	Alack, for lesser knowledge! how accursed
	In being so blest! There may be in the cup
	A spider steep'd, and one may drink, depart,
	And yet partake no venom, for his knowledge
	Is not infected: but if one present
	The abhorr'd ingredient to his eye, make known
	How he hath drunk, he cracks his gorge, his sides,
	With violent hefts. I have drunk,
	and seen the spider.
	Camillo was his help in this, his pander:
	There is a plot against my life, my crown;
	All's true that is mistrusted: that false villain
	Whom I employ'd was pre-employ'd by him:
	He has discover'd my design, and I
	Remain a pinch'd thing; yea, a very trick
	For them to play at will. How came the posterns
	So easily open?

First Lord	                  By his great authority;
	Which often hath no less prevail'd than so
	On your command.

LEONTES	                          I know't too well.
	Give me the boy: I am glad you did not nurse him:
	Though he does bear some signs of me, yet you
	Have too much blood in him.

HERMIONE	What is this? sport?

LEONTES	Bear the boy hence; he shall not come about her;
	Away with him! and let her sport herself
	With that she's big with; for 'tis Polixenes
	Has made thee swell thus.

HERMIONE	But I'ld say he had not,
	And I'll be sworn you would believe my saying,
	Howe'er you lean to the nayward.

LEONTES	You, my lords,
	Look on her, mark her well; be but about
	To say 'she is a goodly lady,' and
	The justice of your bearts will thereto add
	'Tis pity she's not honest, honourable:'
	Praise her but for this her without-door form,
	Which on my faith deserves high speech, and straight
	The shrug, the hum or ha, these petty brands
	That calumny doth use--O, I am out--
	That mercy does, for calumny will sear
	Virtue itself: these shrugs, these hums and ha's,
	When you have said 'she's goodly,' come between
	Ere you can say 'she's honest:' but be 't known,
	From him that has most cause to grieve it should be,
	She's an adulteress.

HERMIONE	Should a villain say so,
	The most replenish'd villain in the world,
	He were as much more villain: you, my lord,
	Do but mistake.

LEONTES	                  You have mistook, my lady,
	Polixenes for Leontes: O thou thing!
	Which I'll not call a creature of thy place,
	Lest barbarism, making me the precedent,
	Should a like language use to all degrees
	And mannerly distinguishment leave out
	Betwixt the prince and beggar: I have said
	She's an adulteress; I have said with whom:
	More, she's a traitor and Camillo is
	A federary with her, and one that knows
	What she should shame to know herself
	But with her most vile principal, that she's
	A bed-swerver, even as bad as those
	That vulgars give bold'st titles, ay, and privy
	To this their late escape.

HERMIONE	No, by my life.
	Privy to none of this. How will this grieve you,
	When you shall come to clearer knowledge, that
	You thus have publish'd me! Gentle my lord,
	You scarce can right me throughly then to say
	You did mistake.

LEONTES	                  No; if I mistake
	In those foundations which I build upon,
	The centre is not big enough to bear
	A school-boy's top. Away with her! to prison!
	He who shall speak for her is afar off guilty
	But that he speaks.

HERMIONE	There's some ill planet reigns:
	I must be patient till the heavens look
	With an aspect more favourable. Good my lords,
	I am not prone to weeping, as our sex
	Commonly are; the want of which vain dew
	Perchance shall dry your pities: but I have
	That honourable grief lodged here which burns
	Worse than tears drown: beseech you all, my lords,
	With thoughts so qualified as your charities
	Shall best instruct you, measure me; and so
	The king's will be perform'd!

LEONTES	Shall I be heard?

HERMIONE	Who is't that goes with me? Beseech your highness,
	My women may be with me; for you see
	My plight requires it. Do not weep, good fools;
	There is no cause: when you shall know your mistress
	Has deserved prison, then abound in tears
	As I come out: this action I now go on
	Is for my better grace. Adieu, my lord:
	I never wish'd to see you sorry; now
	I trust I shall. My women, come; you have leave.

LEONTES	Go, do our bidding; hence!

	[Exit HERMIONE, guarded; with Ladies]

First Lord	Beseech your highness, call the queen again.

ANTIGONUS	Be certain what you do, sir, lest your justice
	Prove violence; in the which three great ones suffer,
	Yourself, your queen, your son.

First Lord	For her, my lord,
	I dare my life lay down and will do't, sir,
	Please you to accept it, that the queen is spotless
	I' the eyes of heaven and to you; I mean,
	In this which you accuse her.

ANTIGONUS	If it prove
	She's otherwise, I'll keep my stables where
	I lodge my wife; I'll go in couples with her;
	Than when I feel and see her no farther trust her;
	For every inch of woman in the world,
	Ay, every dram of woman's flesh is false, If she be.

LEONTES	         Hold your peaces.

First Lord	Good my lord,--

ANTIGONUS	It is for you we speak, not for ourselves:
	You are abused and by some putter-on
	That will be damn'd for't; would I knew the villain,
	I would land-damn him. Be she honour-flaw'd,
	I have three daughters; the eldest is eleven
	The second and the third, nine, and some five;
	If this prove true, they'll pay for't:
	by mine honour,
	I'll geld 'em all; fourteen they shall not see,
	To bring false generations: they are co-heirs;
	And I had rather glib myself than they
	Should not produce fair issue.

LEONTES	Cease; no more.
	You smell this business with a sense as cold
	As is a dead man's nose: but I do see't and feel't
	As you feel doing thus; and see withal
	The instruments that feel.

ANTIGONUS	If it be so,
	We need no grave to bury honesty:
	There's not a grain of it the face to sweeten
	Of the whole dungy earth.

LEONTES	What! lack I credit?

First Lord	I had rather you did lack than I, my lord,
	Upon this ground; and more it would content me
	To have her honour true than your suspicion,
	Be blamed for't how you might.

LEONTES	Why, what need we
	Commune with you of this, but rather follow
	Our forceful instigation? Our prerogative
	Calls not your counsels, but our natural goodness
	Imparts this; which if you, or stupefied
	Or seeming so in skill, cannot or will not
	Relish a truth like us, inform yourselves
	We need no more of your advice: the matter,
	The loss, the gain, the ordering on't, is all
	Properly ours.

ANTIGONUS	                  And I wish, my liege,
	You had only in your silent judgment tried it,
	Without more overture.

LEONTES	How could that be?
	Either thou art most ignorant by age,
	Or thou wert born a fool. Camillo's flight,
	Added to their familiarity,
	Which was as gross as ever touch'd conjecture,
	That lack'd sight only, nought for approbation
	But only seeing, all other circumstances
	Made up to the deed, doth push on this proceeding:
	Yet, for a greater confirmation,
	For in an act of this importance 'twere
	Most piteous to be wild, I have dispatch'd in post
	To sacred Delphos, to Apollo's temple,
	Cleomenes and Dion, whom you know
	Of stuff'd sufficiency: now from the oracle
	They will bring all; whose spiritual counsel had,
	Shall stop or spur me. Have I done well?

First Lord	Well done, my lord.

LEONTES	Though I am satisfied and need no more
	Than what I know, yet shall the oracle
	Give rest to the minds of others, such as he
	Whose ignorant credulity will not
	Come up to the truth. So have we thought it good
	From our free person she should be confined,
	Lest that the treachery of the two fled hence
	Be left her to perform. Come, follow us;
	We are to speak in public; for this business
	Will raise us all.

ANTIGONUS	[Aside]

	To laughter, as I take it,
	If the good truth were known.

	[Exeunt]




	THE WINTER'S TALE


ACT II



SCENE II	A prison.


	[Enter PAULINA, a Gentleman, and Attendants]

PAULINA	The keeper of the prison, call to him;
	let him have knowledge who I am.

	[Exit Gentleman]

		               Good lady,
	No court in Europe is too good for thee;
	What dost thou then in prison?

	[Re-enter Gentleman, with the Gaoler]

		         Now, good sir,
	You know me, do you not?

Gaoler	For a worthy lady
	And one whom much I honour.

PAULINA	Pray you then,
	Conduct me to the queen.

Gaoler	I may not, madam:
	To the contrary I have express commandment.

PAULINA	Here's ado,
	To lock up honesty and honour from
	The access of gentle visitors!
	Is't lawful, pray you,
	To see her women? any of them? Emilia?

Gaoler	So please you, madam,
	To put apart these your attendants, I
	Shall bring Emilia forth.

PAULINA	I pray now, call her.
	Withdraw yourselves.

	[Exeunt Gentleman and Attendants]

Gaoler	And, madam,
	I must be present at your conference.

PAULINA	Well, be't so, prithee.

	[Exit Gaoler]

	Here's such ado to make no stain a stain
	As passes colouring.

	[Re-enter Gaoler, with EMILIA]

	Dear gentlewoman,
	How fares our gracious lady?

EMILIA	As well as one so great and so forlorn
	May hold together: on her frights and griefs,
	Which never tender lady hath born greater,
	She is something before her time deliver'd.

PAULINA	A boy?

EMILIA	     A daughter, and a goodly babe,
	Lusty and like to live: the queen receives
	Much comfort in't; says 'My poor prisoner,
	I am innocent as you.'

PAULINA	I dare be sworn
	These dangerous unsafe lunes i' the king,
	beshrew them!
	He must be told on't, and he shall: the office
	Becomes a woman best; I'll take't upon me:
	If I prove honey-mouth'd let my tongue blister
	And never to my red-look'd anger be
	The trumpet any more. Pray you, Emilia,
	Commend my best obedience to the queen:
	If she dares trust me with her little babe,
	I'll show't the king and undertake to be
	Her advocate to the loud'st. We do not know
	How he may soften at the sight o' the child:
	The silence often of pure innocence
	Persuades when speaking fails.

EMILIA	Most worthy madam,
	Your honour and your goodness is so evident
	That your free undertaking cannot miss
	A thriving issue: there is no lady living
	So meet for this great errand. Please your ladyship
	To visit the next room, I'll presently
	Acquaint the queen of your most noble offer;
	Who but to-day hammer'd of this design,
	But durst not tempt a minister of honour,
	Lest she should be denied.

PAULINA	Tell her, Emilia.
	I'll use that tongue I have: if wit flow from't
	As boldness from my bosom, let 't not be doubted
	I shall do good.

EMILIA	                  Now be you blest for it!
	I'll to the queen: please you,
	come something nearer.

Gaoler	Madam, if't please the queen to send the babe,
	I know not what I shall incur to pass it,
	Having no warrant.

PAULINA	                  You need not fear it, sir:
	This child was prisoner to the womb and is
	By law and process of great nature thence
	Freed and enfranchised, not a party to
	The anger of the king nor guilty of,
	If any be, the trespass of the queen.

Gaoler	I do believe it.

PAULINA	                  Do not you fear: upon mine honour,
	I will stand betwixt you and danger.

	[Exeunt]




	THE WINTER'S TALE


ACT II



SCENE III	A room in LEONTES' palace.


	[Enter LEONTES, ANTIGONUS, Lords, and Servants]

LEONTES	Nor night nor day no rest: it is but weakness
	To bear the matter thus; mere weakness. If
	The cause were not in being,--part o' the cause,
	She the adulteress; for the harlot king
	Is quite beyond mine arm, out of the blank
	And level of my brain, plot-proof; but she
	I can hook to me: say that she were gone,
	Given to the fire, a moiety of my rest
	Might come to me again. Who's there?

First Servant	My lord?

LEONTES	How does the boy?

First Servant	                  He took good rest to-night;
	'Tis hoped his sickness is discharged.

LEONTES	To see his nobleness!
	Conceiving the dishonour of his mother,
	He straight declined, droop'd, took it deeply,
	Fasten'd and fix'd the shame on't in himself,
	Threw off his spirit, his appetite, his sleep,
	And downright languish'd. Leave me solely: go,
	See how he fares.

	[Exit Servant]

	Fie, fie! no thought of him:
	The thought of my revenges that way
	Recoil upon me: in himself too mighty,
	And in his parties, his alliance; let him be
	Until a time may serve: for present vengeance,
	Take it on her. Camillo and Polixenes
	Laugh at me, make their pastime at my sorrow:
	They should not laugh if I could reach them, nor
	Shall she within my power.

	[Enter PAULINA, with a child]

First Lord	You must not enter.

PAULINA	Nay, rather, good my lords, be second to me:
	Fear you his tyrannous passion more, alas,
	Than the queen's life? a gracious innocent soul,
	More free than he is jealous.

ANTIGONUS	That's enough.

Second Servant	Madam, he hath not slept tonight; commanded
	None should come at him.

PAULINA	Not so hot, good sir:
	I come to bring him sleep. 'Tis such as you,
	That creep like shadows by him and do sigh
	At each his needless heavings, such as you
	Nourish the cause of his awaking: I
	Do come with words as medicinal as true,
	Honest as either, to purge him of that humour
	That presses him from sleep.

LEONTES	What noise there, ho?

PAULINA	No noise, my lord; but needful conference
	About some gossips for your highness.

LEONTES	How!
	Away with that audacious lady! Antigonus,
	I charged thee that she should not come about me:
	I knew she would.

ANTIGONUS	                  I told her so, my lord,
	On your displeasure's peril and on mine,
	She should not visit you.

LEONTES	What, canst not rule her?

PAULINA	From all dishonesty he can: in this,
	Unless he take the course that you have done,
	Commit me for committing honour, trust it,
	He shall not rule me.

ANTIGONUS	La you now, you hear:
	When she will take the rein I let her run;
	But she'll not stumble.

PAULINA	Good my liege, I come;
	And, I beseech you, hear me, who profess
	Myself your loyal servant, your physician,
	Your most obedient counsellor, yet that dare
	Less appear so in comforting your evils,
	Than such as most seem yours: I say, I come
	From your good queen.

LEONTES	Good queen!

PAULINA	Good queen, my lord,
	Good queen; I say good queen;
	And would by combat make her good, so were I
	A man, the worst about you.

LEONTES	Force her hence.

PAULINA	Let him that makes but trifles of his eyes
	First hand me: on mine own accord I'll off;
	But first I'll do my errand. The good queen,
	For she is good, hath brought you forth a daughter;
	Here 'tis; commends it to your blessing.

	[Laying down the child]

LEONTES	Out!
	A mankind witch! Hence with her, out o' door:
	A most intelligencing bawd!

PAULINA	Not so:
	I am as ignorant in that as you
	In so entitling me, and no less honest
	Than you are mad; which is enough, I'll warrant,
	As this world goes, to pass for honest.

LEONTES	Traitors!
	Will you not push her out? Give her the bastard.
	Thou dotard! thou art woman-tired, unroosted
	By thy dame Partlet here. Take up the bastard;
	Take't up, I say; give't to thy crone.

PAULINA	For ever
	Unvenerable be thy hands, if thou
	Takest up the princess by that forced baseness
	Which he has put upon't!

LEONTES	He dreads his wife.

PAULINA	So I would you did; then 'twere past all doubt
	You'ld call your children yours.

LEONTES	A nest of traitors!

ANTIGONUS	I am none, by this good light.

PAULINA	Nor I, nor any
	But one that's here, and that's himself, for he
	The sacred honour of himself, his queen's,
	His hopeful son's, his babe's, betrays to slander,
	Whose sting is sharper than the sword's;
	and will not--
	For, as the case now stands, it is a curse
	He cannot be compell'd to't--once remove
	The root of his opinion, which is rotten
	As ever oak or stone was sound.

LEONTES	A callat
	Of boundless tongue, who late hath beat her husband
	And now baits me! This brat is none of mine;
	It is the issue of Polixenes:
	Hence with it, and together with the dam
	Commit them to the fire!

PAULINA	It is yours;
	And, might we lay the old proverb to your charge,
	So like you, 'tis the worse. Behold, my lords,
	Although the print be little, the whole matter
	And copy of the father, eye, nose, lip,
	The trick of's frown, his forehead, nay, the valley,
	The pretty dimples of his chin and cheek,
	His smiles,
	The very mould and frame of hand, nail, finger:
	And thou, good goddess Nature, which hast made it
	So like to him that got it, if thou hast
	The ordering of the mind too, 'mongst all colours
	No yellow in't, lest she suspect, as he does,
	Her children not her husband's!

LEONTES	A gross hag
	And, lozel, thou art worthy to be hang'd,
	That wilt not stay her tongue.

ANTIGONUS	Hang all the husbands
	That cannot do that feat, you'll leave yourself
	Hardly one subject.

LEONTES	Once more, take her hence.

PAULINA	A most unworthy and unnatural lord
	Can do no more.

LEONTES	                  I'll ha' thee burnt.

PAULINA	I care not:
	It is an heretic that makes the fire,
	Not she which burns in't. I'll not call you tyrant;
	But this most cruel usage of your queen,
	Not able to produce more accusation
	Than your own weak-hinged fancy, something savours
	Of tyranny and will ignoble make you,
	Yea, scandalous to the world.

LEONTES	On your allegiance,
	Out of the chamber with her! Were I a tyrant,
	Where were her life? she durst not call me so,
	If she did know me one. Away with her!

PAULINA	I pray you, do not push me; I'll be gone.
	Look to your babe, my lord; 'tis yours:
	Jove send her
	A better guiding spirit! What needs these hands?
	You, that are thus so tender o'er his follies,
	Will never do him good, not one of you.
	So, so: farewell; we are gone.

	[Exit]

LEONTES	Thou, traitor, hast set on thy wife to this.
	My child? away with't! Even thou, that hast
	A heart so tender o'er it, take it hence
	And see it instantly consumed with fire;
	Even thou and none but thou. Take it up straight:
	Within this hour bring me word 'tis done,
	And by good testimony, or I'll seize thy life,
	With what thou else call'st thine. If thou refuse
	And wilt encounter with my wrath, say so;
	The bastard brains with these my proper hands
	Shall I dash out. Go, take it to the fire;
	For thou set'st on thy wife.

ANTIGONUS	I did not, sir:
	These lords, my noble fellows, if they please,
	Can clear me in't.

Lords	                  We can: my royal liege,
	He is not guilty of her coming hither.

LEONTES	You're liars all.

First Lord	Beseech your highness, give us better credit:
	We have always truly served you, and beseech you
	So to esteem of us, and on our knees we beg,
	As recompense of our dear services
	Past and to come, that you do change this purpose,
	Which being so horrible, so bloody, must
	Lead on to some foul issue: we all kneel.

LEONTES	I am a feather for each wind that blows:
	Shall I live on to see this bastard kneel
	And call me father? better burn it now
	Than curse it then. But be it; let it live.
	It shall not neither. You, sir, come you hither;
	You that have been so tenderly officious
	With Lady Margery, your midwife there,
	To save this bastard's life,--for 'tis a bastard,
	So sure as this beard's grey,
	--what will you adventure
	To save this brat's life?

ANTIGONUS	Any thing, my lord,
	That my ability may undergo
	And nobleness impose: at least thus much:
	I'll pawn the little blood which I have left
	To save the innocent: any thing possible.

LEONTES	It shall be possible. Swear by this sword
	Thou wilt perform my bidding.

ANTIGONUS	I will, my lord.

LEONTES	Mark and perform it, see'st thou! for the fail
	Of any point in't shall not only be
	Death to thyself but to thy lewd-tongued wife,
	Whom for this time we pardon. We enjoin thee,
	As thou art liege-man to us, that thou carry
	This female bastard hence and that thou bear it
	To some remote and desert place quite out
	Of our dominions, and that there thou leave it,
	Without more mercy, to its own protection
	And favour of the climate. As by strange fortune
	It came to us, I do in justice charge thee,
	On thy soul's peril and thy body's torture,
	That thou commend it strangely to some place
	Where chance may nurse or end it. Take it up.

ANTIGONUS	I swear to do this, though a present death
	Had been more merciful. Come on, poor babe:
	Some powerful spirit instruct the kites and ravens
	To be thy nurses! Wolves and bears, they say
	Casting their savageness aside have done
	Like offices of pity. Sir, be prosperous
	In more than this deed does require! And blessing
	Against this cruelty fight on thy side,
	Poor thing, condemn'd to loss!

	[Exit with the child]

LEONTES	No, I'll not rear
	Another's issue.

	[Enter a Servant]

Servant	                  Please your highness, posts
	From those you sent to the oracle are come
	An hour since: Cleomenes and Dion,
	Being well arrived from Delphos, are both landed,
	Hasting to the court.

First Lord	So please you, sir, their speed
	Hath been beyond account.

LEONTES	Twenty-three days
	They have been absent: 'tis good speed; foretells
	The great Apollo suddenly will have
	The truth of this appear. Prepare you, lords;
	Summon a session, that we may arraign
	Our most disloyal lady, for, as she hath
	Been publicly accused, so shall she have
	A just and open trial. While she lives
	My heart will be a burthen to me. Leave me,
	And think upon my bidding.

	[Exeunt]




	THE WINTER'S TALE


ACT III



SCENE I	A sea-port in Sicilia.



	[Enter CLEOMENES and DION]

CLEOMENES	The climate's delicate, the air most sweet,
	Fertile the isle, the temple much surpassing
	The common praise it bears.

DION	I shall report,
	For most it caught me, the celestial habits,
	Methinks I so should term them, and the reverence
	Of the grave wearers. O, the sacrifice!
	How ceremonious, solemn and unearthly
	It was i' the offering!

CLEOMENES	But of all, the burst
	And the ear-deafening voice o' the oracle,
	Kin to Jove's thunder, so surprised my sense.
	That I was nothing.

DION	If the event o' the journey
	Prove as successful to the queen,--O be't so!--
	As it hath been to us rare, pleasant, speedy,
	The time is worth the use on't.

CLEOMENES	Great Apollo
	Turn all to the best! These proclamations,
	So forcing faults upon Hermione,
	I little like.

DION	                  The violent carriage of it
	Will clear or end the business: when the oracle,
	Thus by Apollo's great divine seal'd up,
	Shall the contents discover, something rare
	Even then will rush to knowledge. Go: fresh horses!
	And gracious be the issue!

	[Exeunt]




	THE WINTER'S TALE


ACT III



SCENE II	A court of Justice.


	[Enter LEONTES, Lords, and Officers]

LEONTES	This sessions, to our great grief we pronounce,
	Even pushes 'gainst our heart: the party tried
	The daughter of a king, our wife, and one
	Of us too much beloved. Let us be clear'd
	Of being tyrannous, since we so openly
	Proceed in justice, which shall have due course,
	Even to the guilt or the purgation.
	Produce the prisoner.

Officer	It is his highness' pleasure that the queen
	Appear in person here in court. Silence!

	[Enter HERMIONE guarded;
	PAULINA and Ladies attending]

LEONTES	Read the indictment.

Officer	[Reads]            Hermione, queen to the worthy
	Leontes, king of Sicilia, thou art here accused and
	arraigned of high treason, in committing adultery
	with Polixenes, king of Bohemia, and conspiring
	with Camillo to take away the life of our sovereign
	lord the king, thy royal husband: the pretence
	whereof being by circumstances partly laid open,
	thou, Hermione, contrary to the faith and allegiance
	of a true subject, didst counsel and aid them, for
	their better safety, to fly away by night.

HERMIONE	Since what I am to say must be but that
	Which contradicts my accusation and
	The testimony on my part no other
	But what comes from myself, it shall scarce boot me
	To say 'not guilty:' mine integrity
	Being counted falsehood, shall, as I express it,
	Be so received. But thus: if powers divine
	Behold our human actions, as they do,
	I doubt not then but innocence shall make
	False accusation blush and tyranny
	Tremble at patience. You, my lord, best know,
	Who least will seem to do so, my past life
	Hath been as continent, as chaste, as true,
	As I am now unhappy; which is more
	Than history can pattern, though devised
	And play'd to take spectators. For behold me
	A fellow of the royal bed, which owe
	A moiety of the throne a great king's daughter,
	The mother to a hopeful prince, here standing
	To prate and talk for life and honour 'fore
	Who please to come and hear. For life, I prize it
	As I weigh grief, which I would spare: for honour,
	'Tis a derivative from me to mine,
	And only that I stand for. I appeal
	To your own conscience, sir, before Polixenes
	Came to your court, how I was in your grace,
	How merited to be so; since he came,
	With what encounter so uncurrent I
	Have strain'd to appear thus: if one jot beyond
	The bound of honour, or in act or will
	That way inclining, harden'd be the hearts
	Of all that hear me, and my near'st of kin
	Cry fie upon my grave!

LEONTES	I ne'er heard yet
	That any of these bolder vices wanted
	Less impudence to gainsay what they did
	Than to perform it first.

HERMIONE	That's true enough;
	Through 'tis a saying, sir, not due to me.

LEONTES	You will not own it.

HERMIONE	More than mistress of
	Which comes to me in name of fault, I must not
	At all acknowledge. For Polixenes,
	With whom I am accused, I do confess
	I loved him as in honour he required,
	With such a kind of love as might become
	A lady like me, with a love even such,
	So and no other, as yourself commanded:
	Which not to have done I think had been in me
	Both disobedience and ingratitude
	To you and toward your friend, whose love had spoke,
	Even since it could speak, from an infant, freely
	That it was yours. Now, for conspiracy,
	I know not how it tastes; though it be dish'd
	For me to try how: all I know of it
	Is that Camillo was an honest man;
	And why he left your court, the gods themselves,
	Wotting no more than I, are ignorant.

LEONTES	You knew of his departure, as you know
	What you have underta'en to do in's absence.

HERMIONE	Sir,
	You speak a language that I understand not:
	My life stands in the level of your dreams,
	Which I'll lay down.

LEONTES	Your actions are my dreams;
	You had a bastard by Polixenes,
	And I but dream'd it. As you were past all shame,--
	Those of your fact are so--so past all truth:
	Which to deny concerns more than avails; for as
	Thy brat hath been cast out, like to itself,
	No father owning it,--which is, indeed,
	More criminal in thee than it,--so thou
	Shalt feel our justice, in whose easiest passage
	Look for no less than death.

HERMIONE	Sir, spare your threats:
	The bug which you would fright me with I seek.
	To me can life be no commodity:
	The crown and comfort of my life, your favour,
	I do give lost; for I do feel it gone,
	But know not how it went. My second joy
	And first-fruits of my body, from his presence
	I am barr'd, like one infectious. My third comfort
	Starr'd most unluckily, is from my breast,
	The innocent milk in its most innocent mouth,
	Haled out to murder: myself on every post
	Proclaimed a strumpet: with immodest hatred
	The child-bed privilege denied, which 'longs
	To women of all fashion; lastly, hurried
	Here to this place, i' the open air, before
	I have got strength of limit. Now, my liege,
	Tell me what blessings I have here alive,
	That I should fear to die? Therefore proceed.
	But yet hear this: mistake me not; no life,
	I prize it not a straw, but for mine honour,
	Which I would free, if I shall be condemn'd
	Upon surmises, all proofs sleeping else
	But what your jealousies awake, I tell you
	'Tis rigor and not law. Your honours all,
	I do refer me to the oracle:
	Apollo be my judge!

First Lord	This your request
	Is altogether just: therefore bring forth,
	And in Apollos name, his oracle.

	[Exeunt certain Officers]

HERMIONE	The Emperor of Russia was my father:
	O that he were alive, and here beholding
	His daughter's trial! that he did but see
	The flatness of my misery, yet with eyes
	Of pity, not revenge!

	[Re-enter Officers, with CLEOMENES and DION]

Officer	You here shall swear upon this sword of justice,
	That you, Cleomenes and Dion, have
	Been both at Delphos, and from thence have brought
	The seal'd-up oracle, by the hand deliver'd
	Of great Apollo's priest; and that, since then,
	You have not dared to break the holy seal
	Nor read the secrets in't.


CLEOMENES	|
	|	All this we swear.
DION	|


LEONTES	Break up the seals and read.

Officer	[Reads]	Hermione is chaste;
	Polixenes blameless; Camillo a true subject; Leontes
	a jealous tyrant; his innocent babe truly begotten;
	and the king shall live without an heir, if that
	which is lost be not found.

Lords	Now blessed be the great Apollo!

HERMIONE	Praised!

LEONTES	Hast thou read truth?

Officer	Ay, my lord; even so
	As it is here set down.

LEONTES	There is no truth at all i' the oracle:
	The sessions shall proceed: this is mere falsehood.

	[Enter Servant]

Servant	My lord the king, the king!

LEONTES	What is the business?

Servant	O sir, I shall be hated to report it!
	The prince your son, with mere conceit and fear
	Of the queen's speed, is gone.

LEONTES	How! gone!

Servant	Is dead.

LEONTES	Apollo's angry; and the heavens themselves
	Do strike at my injustice.

	[HERMIONE swoons]

		     How now there!

PAULINA	This news is mortal to the queen: look down
	And see what death is doing.

LEONTES	Take her hence:
	Her heart is but o'ercharged; she will recover:
	I have too much believed mine own suspicion:
	Beseech you, tenderly apply to her
	Some remedies for life.

	[Exeunt PAULINA and Ladies, with HERMIONE]

		  Apollo, pardon
	My great profaneness 'gainst thine oracle!
	I'll reconcile me to Polixenes,
	New woo my queen, recall the good Camillo,
	Whom I proclaim a man of truth, of mercy;
	For, being transported by my jealousies
	To bloody thoughts and to revenge, I chose
	Camillo for the minister to poison
	My friend Polixenes: which had been done,
	But that the good mind of Camillo tardied
	My swift command, though I with death and with
	Reward did threaten and encourage him,
	Not doing 't and being done: he, most humane
	And fill'd with honour, to my kingly guest
	Unclasp'd my practise, quit his fortunes here,
	Which you knew great, and to the hazard
	Of all encertainties himself commended,
	No richer than his honour: how he glisters
	Thorough my rust! and how his pity
	Does my deeds make the blacker!

	[Re-enter PAULINA]

PAULINA	Woe the while!
	O, cut my lace, lest my heart, cracking it,
	Break too.

First Lord	          What fit is this, good lady?

PAULINA	What studied torments, tyrant, hast for me?
	What wheels? racks? fires? what flaying? boiling?
	In leads or oils? what old or newer torture
	Must I receive, whose every word deserves
	To taste of thy most worst? Thy tyranny
	Together working with thy jealousies,
	Fancies too weak for boys, too green and idle
	For girls of nine, O, think what they have done
	And then run mad indeed, stark mad! for all
	Thy by-gone fooleries were but spices of it.
	That thou betray'dst Polixenes,'twas nothing;
	That did but show thee, of a fool, inconstant
	And damnable ingrateful: nor was't much,
	Thou wouldst have poison'd good Camillo's honour,
	To have him kill a king: poor trespasses,
	More monstrous standing by: whereof I reckon
	The casting forth to crows thy baby-daughter
	To be or none or little; though a devil
	Would have shed water out of fire ere done't:
	Nor is't directly laid to thee, the death
	Of the young prince, whose honourable thoughts,
	Thoughts high for one so tender, cleft the heart
	That could conceive a gross and foolish sire
	Blemish'd his gracious dam: this is not, no,
	Laid to thy answer: but the last,--O lords,
	When I have said, cry 'woe!' the queen, the queen,
	The sweet'st, dear'st creature's dead,
	and vengeance for't
	Not dropp'd down yet.

First Lord	The higher powers forbid!

PAULINA	I say she's dead; I'll swear't. If word nor oath
	Prevail not, go and see: if you can bring
	Tincture or lustre in her lip, her eye,
	Heat outwardly or breath within, I'll serve you
	As I would do the gods. But, O thou tyrant!
	Do not repent these things, for they are heavier
	Than all thy woes can stir; therefore betake thee
	To nothing but despair. A thousand knees
	Ten thousand years together, naked, fasting,
	Upon a barren mountain and still winter
	In storm perpetual, could not move the gods
	To look that way thou wert.

LEONTES	Go on, go on
	Thou canst not speak too much; I have deserved
	All tongues to talk their bitterest.

First Lord	Say no more:
	Howe'er the business goes, you have made fault
	I' the boldness of your speech.

PAULINA	I am sorry for't:
	All faults I make, when I shall come to know them,
	I do repent. Alas! I have show'd too much
	The rashness of a woman: he is touch'd
	To the noble heart. What's gone and what's past help
	Should be past grief: do not receive affliction
	At my petition; I beseech you, rather
	Let me be punish'd, that have minded you
	Of what you should forget. Now, good my liege
	Sir, royal sir, forgive a foolish woman:
	The love I bore your queen--lo, fool again!--
	I'll speak of her no more, nor of your children;
	I'll not remember you of my own lord,
	Who is lost too: take your patience to you,
	And I'll say nothing.

LEONTES	Thou didst speak but well
	When most the truth; which I receive much better
	Than to be pitied of thee. Prithee, bring me
	To the dead bodies of my queen and son:
	One grave shall be for both: upon them shall
	The causes of their death appear, unto
	Our shame perpetual. Once a day I'll visit
	The chapel where they lie, and tears shed there
	Shall be my recreation: so long as nature
	Will bear up with this exercise, so long
	I daily vow to use it. Come and lead me
	Unto these sorrows.

	[Exeunt]




	THE WINTER'S TALE


ACT III



SCENE III	Bohemia. A desert country near the sea.


	[Enter ANTIGONUS with a Child, and a Mariner]

ANTIGONUS	Thou art perfect then, our ship hath touch'd upon
	The deserts of Bohemia?

Mariner	Ay, my lord: and fear
	We have landed in ill time: the skies look grimly
	And threaten present blusters. In my conscience,
	The heavens with that we have in hand are angry
	And frown upon 's.

ANTIGONUS	Their sacred wills be done! Go, get aboard;
	Look to thy bark: I'll not be long before
	I call upon thee.

Mariner	Make your best haste, and go not
	Too far i' the land: 'tis like to be loud weather;
	Besides, this place is famous for the creatures
	Of prey that keep upon't.

ANTIGONUS	Go thou away:
	I'll follow instantly.

Mariner	I am glad at heart
	To be so rid o' the business.

	[Exit]

ANTIGONUS	Come, poor babe:
	I have heard, but not believed,
	the spirits o' the dead
	May walk again: if such thing be, thy mother
	Appear'd to me last night, for ne'er was dream
	So like a waking. To me comes a creature,
	Sometimes her head on one side, some another;
	I never saw a vessel of like sorrow,
	So fill'd and so becoming: in pure white robes,
	Like very sanctity, she did approach
	My cabin where I lay; thrice bow'd before me,
	And gasping to begin some speech, her eyes
	Became two spouts: the fury spent, anon
	Did this break-from her: 'Good Antigonus,
	Since fate, against thy better disposition,
	Hath made thy person for the thrower-out
	Of my poor babe, according to thine oath,
	Places remote enough are in Bohemia,
	There weep and leave it crying; and, for the babe
	Is counted lost for ever, Perdita,
	I prithee, call't. For this ungentle business
	Put on thee by my lord, thou ne'er shalt see
	Thy wife Paulina more.' And so, with shrieks
	She melted into air. Affrighted much,
	I did in time collect myself and thought
	This was so and no slumber. Dreams are toys:
	Yet for this once, yea, superstitiously,
	I will be squared by this. I do believe
	Hermione hath suffer'd death, and that
	Apollo would, this being indeed the issue
	Of King Polixenes, it should here be laid,
	Either for life or death, upon the earth
	Of its right father. Blossom, speed thee well!
	There lie, and there thy character: there these;
	Which may, if fortune please, both breed thee, pretty,
	And still rest thine. The storm begins; poor wretch,
	That for thy mother's fault art thus exposed
	To loss and what may follow! Weep I cannot,
	But my heart bleeds; and most accursed am I
	To be by oath enjoin'd to this. Farewell!
	The day frowns more and more: thou'rt like to have
	A lullaby too rough: I never saw
	The heavens so dim by day. A savage clamour!
	Well may I get aboard! This is the chase:
	I am gone for ever.

	[Exit, pursued by a bear]

	[Enter a Shepherd]

Shepherd	I would there were no age between sixteen and
	three-and-twenty, or that youth would sleep out the
	rest; for there is nothing in the between but
	getting wenches with child, wronging the ancientry,
	stealing, fighting--Hark you now! Would any but
	these boiled brains of nineteen and two-and-twenty
	hunt this weather? They have scared away two of my
	best sheep, which I fear the wolf will sooner find
	than the master: if any where I have them, 'tis by
	the seaside, browsing of ivy. Good luck, an't be thy
	will what have we here! Mercy on 's, a barne a very
	pretty barne! A boy or a child, I wonder? A
	pretty one; a very pretty one: sure, some 'scape:
	though I am not bookish, yet I can read
	waiting-gentlewoman in the 'scape. This has been
	some stair-work, some trunk-work, some
	behind-door-work: they were warmer that got this
	than the poor thing is here. I'll take it up for
	pity: yet I'll tarry till my son come; he hallooed
	but even now. Whoa, ho, hoa!

	[Enter Clown]

Clown	Hilloa, loa!

Shepherd	What, art so near? If thou'lt see a thing to talk
	on when thou art dead and rotten, come hither. What
	ailest thou, man?

Clown	I have seen two such sights, by sea and by land!
	but I am not to say it is a sea, for it is now the
	sky: betwixt the firmament and it you cannot thrust
	a bodkin's point.

Shepherd	Why, boy, how is it?

Clown	I would you did but see how it chafes, how it rages,
	how it takes up the shore! but that's not the
	point. O, the most piteous cry of the poor souls!
	sometimes to see 'em, and not to see 'em; now the
	ship boring the moon with her main-mast, and anon
	swallowed with yest and froth, as you'ld thrust a
	cork into a hogshead. And then for the
	land-service, to see how the bear tore out his
	shoulder-bone; how he cried to me for help and said
	his name was Antigonus, a nobleman. But to make an
	end of the ship, to see how the sea flap-dragoned
	it: but, first, how the poor souls roared, and the
	sea mocked them; and how the poor gentleman roared
	and the bear mocked him, both roaring louder than
	the sea or weather.

Shepherd	Name of mercy, when was this, boy?

Clown	Now, now: I have not winked since I saw these
	sights: the men are not yet cold under water, nor
	the bear half dined on the gentleman: he's at it
	now.

Shepherd	Would I had been by, to have helped the old man!

Clown	I would you had been by the ship side, to have
	helped her: there your charity would have lacked footing.

Shepherd	Heavy matters! heavy matters! but look thee here,
	boy. Now bless thyself: thou mettest with things
	dying, I with things newborn. Here's a sight for
	thee; look thee, a bearing-cloth for a squire's
	child! look thee here; take up, take up, boy;
	open't. So, let's see: it was told me I should be
	rich by the fairies. This is some changeling:
	open't. What's within, boy?

Clown	You're a made old man: if the sins of your youth
	are forgiven you, you're well to live. Gold! all gold!

Shepherd	This is fairy gold, boy, and 'twill prove so: up
	with't, keep it close: home, home, the next way.
	We are lucky, boy; and to be so still requires
	nothing but secrecy. Let my sheep go: come, good
	boy, the next way home.

Clown	Go you the next way with your findings. I'll go see
	if the bear be gone from the gentleman and how much
	he hath eaten: they are never curst but when they
	are hungry: if there be any of him left, I'll bury
	it.

Shepherd	That's a good deed. If thou mayest discern by that
	which is left of him what he is, fetch me to the
	sight of him.

Clown	Marry, will I; and you shall help to put him i' the ground.

Shepherd	'Tis a lucky day, boy, and we'll do good deeds on't.

	[Exeunt]




	THE WINTER'S TALE


ACT IV



SCENE I:


	[Enter Time, the Chorus]

Time	I, that please some, try all, both joy and terror
	Of good and bad, that makes and unfolds error,
	Now take upon me, in the name of Time,
	To use my wings. Impute it not a crime
	To me or my swift passage, that I slide
	O'er sixteen years and leave the growth untried
	Of that wide gap, since it is in my power
	To o'erthrow law and in one self-born hour
	To plant and o'erwhelm custom. Let me pass
	The same I am, ere ancient'st order was
	Or what is now received: I witness to
	The times that brought them in; so shall I do
	To the freshest things now reigning and make stale
	The glistering of this present, as my tale
	Now seems to it. Your patience this allowing,
	I turn my glass and give my scene such growing
	As you had slept between: Leontes leaving,
	The effects of his fond jealousies so grieving
	That he shuts up himself, imagine me,
	Gentle spectators, that I now may be
	In fair Bohemia, and remember well,
	I mentioned a son o' the king's, which Florizel
	I now name to you; and with speed so pace
	To speak of Perdita, now grown in grace
	Equal with wondering: what of her ensues
	I list not prophecy; but let Time's news
	Be known when 'tis brought forth.
	A shepherd's daughter,
	And what to her adheres, which follows after,
	Is the argument of Time. Of this allow,
	If ever you have spent time worse ere now;
	If never, yet that Time himself doth say
	He wishes earnestly you never may.

	[Exit]




	THE WINTER'S TALE


ACT IV



SCENE II	Bohemia. The palace of POLIXENES.


	[Enter POLIXENES and CAMILLO]

POLIXENES	I pray thee, good Camillo, be no more importunate:
	'tis a sickness denying thee any thing; a death to
	grant this.

CAMILLO	It is fifteen years since I saw my country: though
	I have for the most part been aired abroad, I
	desire to lay my bones there. Besides, the penitent
	king, my master, hath sent for me; to whose feeling
	sorrows I might be some allay, or I o'erween to
	think so, which is another spur to my departure.

POLIXENES	As thou lovest me, Camillo, wipe not out the rest of
	thy services by leaving me now: the need I have of
	thee thine own goodness hath made; better not to
	have had thee than thus to want thee: thou, having
	made me businesses which none without thee can
	sufficiently manage, must either stay to execute
	them thyself or take away with thee the very
	services thou hast done; which if I have not enough
	considered, as too much I cannot, to be more
	thankful to thee shall be my study, and my profit
	therein the heaping friendships. Of that fatal
	country, Sicilia, prithee speak no more; whose very
	naming punishes me with the remembrance of that
	penitent, as thou callest him, and reconciled king,
	my brother; whose loss of his most precious queen
	and children are even now to be afresh lamented.
	Say to me, when sawest thou the Prince Florizel, my
	son? Kings are no less unhappy, their issue not
	being gracious, than they are in losing them when
	they have approved their virtues.

CAMILLO	Sir, it is three days since I saw the prince. What
	his happier affairs may be, are to me unknown: but I
	have missingly noted, he is of late much retired
	from court and is less frequent to his princely
	exercises than formerly he hath appeared.

POLIXENES	I have considered so much, Camillo, and with some
	care; so far that I have eyes under my service which
	look upon his removedness; from whom I have this
	intelligence, that he is seldom from the house of a
	most homely shepherd; a man, they say, that from
	very nothing, and beyond the imagination of his
	neighbours, is grown into an unspeakable estate.

CAMILLO	I have heard, sir, of such a man, who hath a
	daughter of most rare note: the report of her is
	extended more than can be thought to begin from such a cottage.

POLIXENES	That's likewise part of my intelligence; but, I
	fear, the angle that plucks our son thither. Thou
	shalt accompany us to the place; where we will, not
	appearing what we are, have some question with the
	shepherd; from whose simplicity I think it not
	uneasy to get the cause of my son's resort thither.
	Prithee, be my present partner in this business, and
	lay aside the thoughts of Sicilia.

CAMILLO	I willingly obey your command.

POLIXENES	My best Camillo! We must disguise ourselves.

	[Exeunt]




	THE WINTER'S TALE


ACT IV



SCENE III	A road near the Shepherd's cottage.


	[Enter AUTOLYCUS, singing]

AUTOLYCUS	When daffodils begin to peer,
	With heigh! the doxy over the dale,
	Why, then comes in the sweet o' the year;
	For the red blood reigns in the winter's pale.

	The white sheet bleaching on the hedge,
	With heigh! the sweet birds, O, how they sing!
	Doth set my pugging tooth on edge;
	For a quart of ale is a dish for a king.

	The lark, that tirra-lyra chants,
	With heigh! with heigh! the thrush and the jay,
	Are summer songs for me and my aunts,
	While we lie tumbling in the hay.

	I have served Prince Florizel and in my time
	wore three-pile; but now I am out of service:

	But shall I go mourn for that, my dear?
	The pale moon shines by night:
	And when I wander here and there,
	I then do most go right.

	If tinkers may have leave to live,
	And bear the sow-skin budget,
	Then my account I well may, give,
	And in the stocks avouch it.

	My traffic is sheets; when the kite builds, look to
	lesser linen. My father named me Autolycus; who
	being, as I am, littered under Mercury, was likewise
	a snapper-up of unconsidered trifles. With die and
	drab I purchased this caparison, and my revenue is
	the silly cheat. Gallows and knock are too powerful
	on the highway: beating and hanging are terrors to
	me: for the life to come, I sleep out the thought
	of it. A prize! a prize!

	[Enter Clown]

Clown	Let me see: every 'leven wether tods; every tod
	yields pound and odd shilling; fifteen hundred
	shorn. what comes the wool to?

AUTOLYCUS	[Aside]

	If the springe hold, the cock's mine.

Clown	I cannot do't without counters. Let me see; what am
	I to buy for our sheep-shearing feast? Three pound
	of sugar, five pound of currants, rice,--what will
	this sister of mine do with rice? But my father
	hath made her mistress of the feast, and she lays it
	on. She hath made me four and twenty nose-gays for
	the shearers, three-man-song-men all, and very good
	ones; but they are most of them means and bases; but
	one puritan amongst them, and he sings psalms to
	horn-pipes. I must have saffron to colour the warden
	pies; mace; dates?--none, that's out of my note;
	nutmegs, seven; a race or two of ginger, but that I
	may beg; four pound of prunes, and as many of
	raisins o' the sun.

AUTOLYCUS	O that ever I was born!

	[Grovelling on the ground]

Clown	I' the name of me--

AUTOLYCUS	O, help me, help me! pluck but off these rags; and
	then, death, death!

Clown	Alack, poor soul! thou hast need of more rags to lay
	on thee, rather than have these off.

AUTOLYCUS	O sir, the loathsomeness of them offends me more
	than the stripes I have received, which are mighty
	ones and millions.

Clown	Alas, poor man! a million of beating may come to a
	great matter.

AUTOLYCUS	I am robbed, sir, and beaten; my money and apparel
	ta'en from me, and these detestable things put upon
	me.

Clown	What, by a horseman, or a footman?

AUTOLYCUS	A footman, sweet sir, a footman.

Clown	Indeed, he should be a footman by the garments he
	has left with thee: if this be a horseman's coat,
	it hath seen very hot service. Lend me thy hand,
	I'll help thee: come, lend me thy hand.

AUTOLYCUS	O, good sir, tenderly, O!

Clown	Alas, poor soul!

AUTOLYCUS	O, good sir, softly, good sir! I fear, sir, my
	shoulder-blade is out.

Clown	How now! canst stand?

AUTOLYCUS	[Picking his pocket]

	Softly, dear sir; good sir, softly. You ha' done me
	a charitable office.

Clown	Dost lack any money? I have a little money for thee.

AUTOLYCUS	No, good sweet sir; no, I beseech you, sir: I have
	a kinsman not past three quarters of a mile hence,
	unto whom I was going; I shall there have money, or
	any thing I want: offer me no money, I pray you;
	that kills my heart.

Clown	What manner of fellow was he that robbed you?

AUTOLYCUS	A fellow, sir, that I have known to go about with
	troll-my-dames; I knew him once a servant of the
	prince: I cannot tell, good sir, for which of his
	virtues it was, but he was certainly whipped out of the court.

Clown	His vices, you would say; there's no virtue whipped
	out of the court: they cherish it to make it stay
	there; and yet it will no more but abide.

AUTOLYCUS	Vices, I would say, sir. I know this man well: he
	hath been since an ape-bearer; then a
	process-server, a bailiff; then he compassed a
	motion of the Prodigal Son, and married a tinker's
	wife within a mile where my land and living lies;
	and, having flown over many knavish professions, he
	settled only in rogue: some call him Autolycus.

Clown	Out upon him! prig, for my life, prig: he haunts
	wakes, fairs and bear-baitings.

AUTOLYCUS	Very true, sir; he, sir, he; that's the rogue that
	put me into this apparel.

Clown	Not a more cowardly rogue in all Bohemia: if you had
	but looked big and spit at him, he'ld have run.

AUTOLYCUS	I must confess to you, sir, I am no fighter: I am
	false of heart that way; and that he knew, I warrant
	him.

Clown	How do you now?

AUTOLYCUS	Sweet sir, much better than I was; I can stand and
	walk: I will even take my leave of you, and pace
	softly towards my kinsman's.

Clown	Shall I bring thee on the way?

AUTOLYCUS	No, good-faced sir; no, sweet sir.

Clown	Then fare thee well: I must go buy spices for our
	sheep-shearing.

AUTOLYCUS	Prosper you, sweet sir!

	[Exit Clown]

	Your purse is not hot enough to purchase your spice.
	I'll be with you at your sheep-shearing too: if I
	make not this cheat bring out another and the
	shearers prove sheep, let me be unrolled and my name
	put in the book of virtue!

	[Sings]

	Jog on, jog on, the foot-path way,
	And merrily hent the stile-a:
	A merry heart goes all the day,
	Your sad tires in a mile-a.

	[Exit]




	THE WINTER'S TALE


ACT IV



SCENE IV	The Shepherd's cottage.


	[Enter FLORIZEL and PERDITA]

FLORIZEL	These your unusual weeds to each part of you
	Do give a life: no shepherdess, but Flora
	Peering in April's front. This your sheep-shearing
	Is as a meeting of the petty gods,
	And you the queen on't.

PERDITA	Sir, my gracious lord,
	To chide at your extremes it not becomes me:
	O, pardon, that I name them! Your high self,
	The gracious mark o' the land, you have obscured
	With a swain's wearing, and me, poor lowly maid,
	Most goddess-like prank'd up: but that our feasts
	In every mess have folly and the feeders
	Digest it with a custom, I should blush
	To see you so attired, sworn, I think,
	To show myself a glass.

FLORIZEL	I bless the time
	When my good falcon made her flight across
	Thy father's ground.

PERDITA	Now Jove afford you cause!
	To me the difference forges dread; your greatness
	Hath not been used to fear. Even now I tremble
	To think your father, by some accident,
	Should pass this way as you did: O, the Fates!
	How would he look, to see his work so noble
	Vilely bound up? What would he say? Or how
	Should I, in these my borrow'd flaunts, behold
	The sternness of his presence?

FLORIZEL	Apprehend
	Nothing but jollity. The gods themselves,
	Humbling their deities to love, have taken
	The shapes of beasts upon them: Jupiter
	Became a bull, and bellow'd; the green Neptune
	A ram, and bleated; and the fire-robed god,
	Golden Apollo, a poor humble swain,
	As I seem now. Their transformations
	Were never for a piece of beauty rarer,
	Nor in a way so chaste, since my desires
	Run not before mine honour, nor my lusts
	Burn hotter than my faith.

PERDITA	O, but, sir,
	Your resolution cannot hold, when 'tis
	Opposed, as it must be, by the power of the king:
	One of these two must be necessities,
	Which then will speak, that you must
	change this purpose,
	Or I my life.

FLORIZEL	                  Thou dearest Perdita,
	With these forced thoughts, I prithee, darken not
	The mirth o' the feast. Or I'll be thine, my fair,
	Or not my father's. For I cannot be
	Mine own, nor any thing to any, if
	I be not thine. To this I am most constant,
	Though destiny say no. Be merry, gentle;
	Strangle such thoughts as these with any thing
	That you behold the while. Your guests are coming:
	Lift up your countenance, as it were the day
	Of celebration of that nuptial which
	We two have sworn shall come.

PERDITA	O lady Fortune,
	Stand you auspicious!

FLORIZEL	See, your guests approach:
	Address yourself to entertain them sprightly,
	And let's be red with mirth.

	[Enter Shepherd, Clown, MOPSA, DORCAS, and
	others, with POLIXENES and CAMILLO disguised]

Shepherd	Fie, daughter! when my old wife lived, upon
	This day she was both pantler, butler, cook,
	Both dame and servant; welcomed all, served all;
	Would sing her song and dance her turn; now here,
	At upper end o' the table, now i' the middle;
	On his shoulder, and his; her face o' fire
	With labour and the thing she took to quench it,
	She would to each one sip. You are retired,
	As if you were a feasted one and not
	The hostess of the meeting: pray you, bid
	These unknown friends to's welcome; for it is
	A way to make us better friends, more known.
	Come, quench your blushes and present yourself
	That which you are, mistress o' the feast: come on,
	And bid us welcome to your sheep-shearing,
	As your good flock shall prosper.

PERDITA	[To POLIXENES]                  Sir, welcome:
	It is my father's will I should take on me
	The hostess-ship o' the day.

	[To CAMILLO]

		       You're welcome, sir.
	Give me those flowers there, Dorcas. Reverend sirs,
	For you there's rosemary and rue; these keep
	Seeming and savour all the winter long:
	Grace and remembrance be to you both,
	And welcome to our shearing!

POLIXENES	Shepherdess,
	A fair one are you--well you fit our ages
	With flowers of winter.

PERDITA	Sir, the year growing ancient,
	Not yet on summer's death, nor on the birth
	Of trembling winter, the fairest
	flowers o' the season
	Are our carnations and streak'd gillyvors,
	Which some call nature's bastards: of that kind
	Our rustic garden's barren; and I care not
	To get slips of them.

POLIXENES	Wherefore, gentle maiden,
	Do you neglect them?

PERDITA	For I have heard it said
	There is an art which in their piedness shares
	With great creating nature.

POLIXENES	Say there be;
	Yet nature is made better by no mean
	But nature makes that mean: so, over that art
	Which you say adds to nature, is an art
	That nature makes. You see, sweet maid, we marry
	A gentler scion to the wildest stock,
	And make conceive a bark of baser kind
	By bud of nobler race: this is an art
	Which does mend nature, change it rather, but
	The art itself is nature.

PERDITA	So it is.

POLIXENES	Then make your garden rich in gillyvors,
	And do not call them bastards.

PERDITA	I'll not put
	The dibble in earth to set one slip of them;
	No more than were I painted I would wish
	This youth should say 'twere well and only therefore
	Desire to breed by me. Here's flowers for you;
	Hot lavender, mints, savoury, marjoram;
	The marigold, that goes to bed wi' the sun
	And with him rises weeping: these are flowers
	Of middle summer, and I think they are given
	To men of middle age. You're very welcome.

CAMILLO	I should leave grazing, were I of your flock,
	And only live by gazing.

PERDITA	Out, alas!
	You'd be so lean, that blasts of January
	Would blow you through and through.
	Now, my fair'st friend,
	I would I had some flowers o' the spring that might
	Become your time of day; and yours, and yours,
	That wear upon your virgin branches yet
	Your maidenheads growing: O Proserpina,
	For the flowers now, that frighted thou let'st fall
	From Dis's waggon! daffodils,
	That come before the swallow dares, and take
	The winds of March with beauty; violets dim,
	But sweeter than the lids of Juno's eyes
	Or Cytherea's breath; pale primroses
	That die unmarried, ere they can behold
	Bight Phoebus in his strength--a malady
	Most incident to maids; bold oxlips and
	The crown imperial; lilies of all kinds,
	The flower-de-luce being one! O, these I lack,
	To make you garlands of, and my sweet friend,
	To strew him o'er and o'er!

FLORIZEL	What, like a corse?

PERDITA	No, like a bank for love to lie and play on;
	Not like a corse; or if, not to be buried,
	But quick and in mine arms. Come, take your flowers:
	Methinks I play as I have seen them do
	In Whitsun pastorals: sure this robe of mine
	Does change my disposition.

FLORIZEL	What you do
	Still betters what is done. When you speak, sweet.
	I'ld have you do it ever: when you sing,
	I'ld have you buy and sell so, so give alms,
	Pray so; and, for the ordering your affairs,
	To sing them too: when you do dance, I wish you
	A wave o' the sea, that you might ever do
	Nothing but that; move still, still so,
	And own no other function: each your doing,
	So singular in each particular,
	Crowns what you are doing in the present deed,
	That all your acts are queens.

PERDITA	O Doricles,
	Your praises are too large: but that your youth,
	And the true blood which peepeth fairly through't,
	Do plainly give you out an unstain'd shepherd,
	With wisdom I might fear, my Doricles,
	You woo'd me the false way.

FLORIZEL	I think you have
	As little skill to fear as I have purpose
	To put you to't. But come; our dance, I pray:
	Your hand, my Perdita: so turtles pair,
	That never mean to part.

PERDITA	I'll swear for 'em.

POLIXENES	This is the prettiest low-born lass that ever
	Ran on the green-sward: nothing she does or seems
	But smacks of something greater than herself,
	Too noble for this place.

CAMILLO	He tells her something
	That makes her blood look out: good sooth, she is
	The queen of curds and cream.

Clown	Come on, strike up!

DORCAS	Mopsa must be your mistress: marry, garlic,
	To mend her kissing with!

MOPSA	Now, in good time!

Clown	Not a word, a word; we stand upon our manners.
	Come, strike up!

	[Music. Here a dance of Shepherds and
	Shepherdesses]

POLIXENES	Pray, good shepherd, what fair swain is this
	Which dances with your daughter?

Shepherd	They call him Doricles; and boasts himself
	To have a worthy feeding: but I have it
	Upon his own report and I believe it;
	He looks like sooth. He says he loves my daughter:
	I think so too; for never gazed the moon
	Upon the water as he'll stand and read
	As 'twere my daughter's eyes: and, to be plain.
	I think there is not half a kiss to choose
	Who loves another best.

POLIXENES	She dances featly.

Shepherd	So she does any thing; though I report it,
	That should be silent: if young Doricles
	Do light upon her, she shall bring him that
	Which he not dreams of.

	[Enter Servant]

Servant	O master, if you did but hear the pedlar at the
	door, you would never dance again after a tabour and
	pipe; no, the bagpipe could not move you: he sings
	several tunes faster than you'll tell money; he
	utters them as he had eaten ballads and all men's
	ears grew to his tunes.

Clown	He could never come better; he shall come in. I
	love a ballad but even too well, if it be doleful
	matter merrily set down, or a very pleasant thing
	indeed and sung lamentably.

Servant	He hath songs for man or woman, of all sizes; no
	milliner can so fit his customers with gloves: he
	has the prettiest love-songs for maids; so without
	bawdry, which is strange; with such delicate
	burthens of dildos and fadings, 'jump her and thump
	her;' and where some stretch-mouthed rascal would,
	as it were, mean mischief and break a foul gap into
	the matter, he makes the maid to answer 'Whoop, do me
	no harm, good man;' puts him off, slights him, with
	'Whoop, do me no harm, good man.'

POLIXENES	This is a brave fellow.

Clown	Believe me, thou talkest of an admirable conceited
	fellow. Has he any unbraided wares?

Servant	He hath ribbons of an the colours i' the rainbow;
	points more than all the lawyers in Bohemia can
	learnedly handle, though they come to him by the
	gross: inkles, caddisses, cambrics, lawns: why, he
	sings 'em over as they were gods or goddesses; you
	would think a smock were a she-angel, he so chants
	to the sleeve-hand and the work about the square on't.

Clown	Prithee bring him in; and let him approach singing.

PERDITA	Forewarn him that he use no scurrilous words in 's tunes.

	[Exit Servant]

Clown	You have of these pedlars, that have more in them
	than you'ld think, sister.

PERDITA	Ay, good brother, or go about to think.

	[Enter AUTOLYCUS, singing]

AUTOLYCUS	     Lawn as white as driven snow;
	Cyprus black as e'er was crow;
	Gloves as sweet as damask roses;
	Masks for faces and for noses;
	Bugle bracelet, necklace amber,
	Perfume for a lady's chamber;
	Golden quoifs and stomachers,
	For my lads to give their dears:
	Pins and poking-sticks of steel,
	What maids lack from head to heel:
	Come buy of me, come; come buy, come buy;
	Buy lads, or else your lasses cry: Come buy.

Clown	If I were not in love with Mopsa, thou shouldst take
	no money of me; but being enthralled as I am, it
	will also be the bondage of certain ribbons and gloves.

MOPSA	I was promised them against the feast; but they come
	not too late now.

DORCAS	He hath promised you more than that, or there be liars.

MOPSA	He hath paid you all he promised you; may be, he has
	paid you more, which will shame you to give him again.

Clown	Is there no manners left among maids? will they
	wear their plackets where they should bear their
	faces? Is there not milking-time, when you are
	going to bed, or kiln-hole, to whistle off these
	secrets, but you must be tittle-tattling before all
	our guests? 'tis well they are whispering: clamour
	your tongues, and not a word more.

MOPSA	I have done. Come, you promised me a tawdry-lace
	and a pair of sweet gloves.

Clown	Have I not told thee how I was cozened by the way
	and lost all my money?

AUTOLYCUS	And indeed, sir, there are cozeners abroad;
	therefore it behoves men to be wary.

Clown	Fear not thou, man, thou shalt lose nothing here.

AUTOLYCUS	I hope so, sir; for I have about me many parcels of charge.

Clown	What hast here? ballads?

MOPSA	Pray now, buy some: I love a ballad in print o'
	life, for then we are sure they are true.

AUTOLYCUS	Here's one to a very doleful tune, how a usurer's
	wife was brought to bed of twenty money-bags at a
	burthen and how she longed to eat adders' heads and
	toads carbonadoed.

MOPSA	Is it true, think you?

AUTOLYCUS	Very true, and but a month old.

DORCAS	Bless me from marrying a usurer!

AUTOLYCUS	Here's the midwife's name to't, one Mistress
	Tale-porter, and five or six honest wives that were
	present. Why should I carry lies abroad?

MOPSA	Pray you now, buy it.

Clown	Come on, lay it by: and let's first see moe
	ballads; we'll buy the other things anon.

AUTOLYCUS	Here's another ballad of a fish, that appeared upon
	the coast on Wednesday the four-score of April,
	forty thousand fathom above water, and sung this
	ballad against the hard hearts of maids: it was
	thought she was a woman and was turned into a cold
	fish for she would not exchange flesh with one that
	loved her: the ballad is very pitiful and as true.

DORCAS	Is it true too, think you?

AUTOLYCUS	Five justices' hands at it, and witnesses more than
	my pack will hold.

Clown	Lay it by too: another.

AUTOLYCUS	This is a merry ballad, but a very pretty one.

MOPSA	Let's have some merry ones.

AUTOLYCUS	Why, this is a passing merry one and goes to
	the tune of 'Two maids wooing a man:' there's
	scarce a maid westward but she sings it; 'tis in
	request, I can tell you.

MOPSA	We can both sing it: if thou'lt bear a part, thou
	shalt hear; 'tis in three parts.

DORCAS	We had the tune on't a month ago.

AUTOLYCUS	I can bear my part; you must know 'tis my
	occupation; have at it with you.
	[SONG]

AUTOLYCUS	Get you hence, for I must go
	Where it fits not you to know.

DORCAS	     Whither?

MOPSA	                  O, whither?

DORCAS	Whither?

MOPSA	     It becomes thy oath full well,
	Thou to me thy secrets tell.

DORCAS	          Me too, let me go thither.

MOPSA	     Or thou goest to the orange or mill.

DORCAS	     If to either, thou dost ill.

AUTOLYCUS	Neither.

DORCAS	       What, neither?

AUTOLYCUS	Neither.

DORCAS	     Thou hast sworn my love to be.

MOPSA	     Thou hast sworn it more to me:
	Then whither goest? say, whither?

Clown	We'll have this song out anon by ourselves: my
	father and the gentlemen are in sad talk, and we'll
	not trouble them. Come, bring away thy pack after
	me. Wenches, I'll buy for you both. Pedlar, let's
	have the first choice. Follow me, girls.

	[Exit with DORCAS and MOPSA]

AUTOLYCUS	And you shall pay well for 'em.

	[Follows singing]

	Will you buy any tape,
	Or lace for your cape,
	My dainty duck, my dear-a?
	Any silk, any thread,
	Any toys for your head,
	Of the new'st and finest, finest wear-a?
	Come to the pedlar;
	Money's a medler.
	That doth utter all men's ware-a.

	[Exit]

	[Re-enter Servant]

Servant	Master, there is three carters, three shepherds,
	three neat-herds, three swine-herds, that have made
	themselves all men of hair, they call themselves
	Saltiers, and they have a dance which the wenches
	say is a gallimaufry of gambols, because they are
	not in't; but they themselves are o' the mind, if it
	be not too rough for some that know little but
	bowling, it will please plentifully.

Shepherd	Away! we'll none on 't: here has been too much
	homely foolery already. I know, sir, we weary you.

POLIXENES	You weary those that refresh us: pray, let's see
	these four threes of herdsmen.

Servant	One three of them, by their own report, sir, hath
	danced before the king; and not the worst of the
	three but jumps twelve foot and a half by the squier.

Shepherd	Leave your prating: since these good men are
	pleased, let them come in; but quickly now.

Servant	Why, they stay at door, sir.

	[Exit]

	[Here a dance of twelve Satyrs]

POLIXENES	O, father, you'll know more of that hereafter.

	[To CAMILLO]

	Is it not too far gone? 'Tis time to part them.
	He's simple and tells much.

	[To FLORIZEL]

		      How now, fair shepherd!
	Your heart is full of something that does take
	Your mind from feasting. Sooth, when I was young
	And handed love as you do, I was wont
	To load my she with knacks: I would have ransack'd
	The pedlar's silken treasury and have pour'd it
	To her acceptance; you have let him go
	And nothing marted with him. If your lass
	Interpretation should abuse and call this
	Your lack of love or bounty, you were straited
	For a reply, at least if you make a care
	Of happy holding her.

FLORIZEL	Old sir, I know
	She prizes not such trifles as these are:
	The gifts she looks from me are pack'd and lock'd
	Up in my heart; which I have given already,
	But not deliver'd. O, hear me breathe my life
	Before this ancient sir, who, it should seem,
	Hath sometime loved! I take thy hand, this hand,
	As soft as dove's down and as white as it,
	Or Ethiopian's tooth, or the fann'd
	snow that's bolted
	By the northern blasts twice o'er.

POLIXENES	What follows this?
	How prettily the young swain seems to wash
	The hand was fair before! I have put you out:
	But to your protestation; let me hear
	What you profess.

FLORIZEL	                  Do, and be witness to 't.

POLIXENES	And this my neighbour too?

FLORIZEL	And he, and more
	Than he, and men, the earth, the heavens, and all:
	That, were I crown'd the most imperial monarch,
	Thereof most worthy, were I the fairest youth
	That ever made eye swerve, had force and knowledge
	More than was ever man's, I would not prize them
	Without her love; for her employ them all;
	Commend them and condemn them to her service
	Or to their own perdition.

POLIXENES	Fairly offer'd.

CAMILLO	This shows a sound affection.

Shepherd	But, my daughter,
	Say you the like to him?

PERDITA	I cannot speak
	So well, nothing so well; no, nor mean better:
	By the pattern of mine own thoughts I cut out
	The purity of his.

Shepherd	                  Take hands, a bargain!
	And, friends unknown, you shall bear witness to 't:
	I give my daughter to him, and will make
	Her portion equal his.

FLORIZEL	O, that must be
	I' the virtue of your daughter: one being dead,
	I shall have more than you can dream of yet;
	Enough then for your wonder. But, come on,
	Contract us 'fore these witnesses.

Shepherd	Come, your hand;
	And, daughter, yours.

POLIXENES	Soft, swain, awhile, beseech you;
	Have you a father?

FLORIZEL	                  I have: but what of him?

POLIXENES	Knows he of this?

FLORIZEL	                  He neither does nor shall.

POLIXENES	Methinks a father
	Is at the nuptial of his son a guest
	That best becomes the table. Pray you once more,
	Is not your father grown incapable
	Of reasonable affairs? is he not stupid
	With age and altering rheums? can he speak? hear?
	Know man from man? dispute his own estate?
	Lies he not bed-rid? and again does nothing
	But what he did being childish?

FLORIZEL	No, good sir;
	He has his health and ampler strength indeed
	Than most have of his age.

POLIXENES	By my white beard,
	You offer him, if this be so, a wrong
	Something unfilial: reason my son
	Should choose himself a wife, but as good reason
	The father, all whose joy is nothing else
	But fair posterity, should hold some counsel
	In such a business.

FLORIZEL	I yield all this;
	But for some other reasons, my grave sir,
	Which 'tis not fit you know, I not acquaint
	My father of this business.

POLIXENES	Let him know't.

FLORIZEL	He shall not.

POLIXENES	                  Prithee, let him.

FLORIZEL	No, he must not.

Shepherd	Let him, my son: he shall not need to grieve
	At knowing of thy choice.

FLORIZEL	Come, come, he must not.
	Mark our contract.

POLIXENES	                  Mark your divorce, young sir,

	[Discovering himself]

	Whom son I dare not call; thou art too base
	To be acknowledged: thou a sceptre's heir,
	That thus affect'st a sheep-hook! Thou old traitor,
	I am sorry that by hanging thee I can
	But shorten thy life one week. And thou, fresh piece
	Of excellent witchcraft, who of force must know
	The royal fool thou copest with,--

Shepherd	O, my heart!

POLIXENES	I'll have thy beauty scratch'd with briers, and made
	More homely than thy state. For thee, fond boy,
	If I may ever know thou dost but sigh
	That thou no more shalt see this knack, as never
	I mean thou shalt, we'll bar thee from succession;
	Not hold thee of our blood, no, not our kin,
	Far than Deucalion off: mark thou my words:
	Follow us to the court. Thou churl, for this time,
	Though full of our displeasure, yet we free thee
	From the dead blow of it. And you, enchantment.--
	Worthy enough a herdsman: yea, him too,
	That makes himself, but for our honour therein,
	Unworthy thee,--if ever henceforth thou
	These rural latches to his entrance open,
	Or hoop his body more with thy embraces,
	I will devise a death as cruel for thee
	As thou art tender to't.

	[Exit]

PERDITA	Even here undone!
	I was not much afeard; for once or twice
	I was about to speak and tell him plainly,
	The selfsame sun that shines upon his court
	Hides not his visage from our cottage but
	Looks on alike. Will't please you, sir, be gone?
	I told you what would come of this: beseech you,
	Of your own state take care: this dream of mine,--
	Being now awake, I'll queen it no inch farther,
	But milk my ewes and weep.

CAMILLO	Why, how now, father!
	Speak ere thou diest.

Shepherd	I cannot speak, nor think
	Nor dare to know that which I know. O sir!
	You have undone a man of fourscore three,
	That thought to fill his grave in quiet, yea,
	To die upon the bed my father died,
	To lie close by his honest bones: but now
	Some hangman must put on my shroud and lay me
	Where no priest shovels in dust. O cursed wretch,
	That knew'st this was the prince,
	and wouldst adventure
	To mingle faith with him! Undone! undone!
	If I might die within this hour, I have lived
	To die when I desire.

	[Exit]

FLORIZEL	Why look you so upon me?
	I am but sorry, not afeard; delay'd,
	But nothing alter'd: what I was, I am;
	More straining on for plucking back, not following
	My leash unwillingly.

CAMILLO	Gracious my lord,
	You know your father's temper: at this time
	He will allow no speech, which I do guess
	You do not purpose to him; and as hardly
	Will he endure your sight as yet, I fear:
	Then, till the fury of his highness settle,
	Come not before him.

FLORIZEL	I not purpose it.
	I think, Camillo?

CAMILLO	                  Even he, my lord.

PERDITA	How often have I told you 'twould be thus!
	How often said, my dignity would last
	But till 'twere known!

FLORIZEL	It cannot fail but by
	The violation of my faith; and then
	Let nature crush the sides o' the earth together
	And mar the seeds within! Lift up thy looks:
	From my succession wipe me, father; I
	Am heir to my affection.

CAMILLO	Be advised.

FLORIZEL	I am, and by my fancy: if my reason
	Will thereto be obedient, I have reason;
	If not, my senses, better pleased with madness,
	Do bid it welcome.

CAMILLO	                  This is desperate, sir.

FLORIZEL	So call it: but it does fulfil my vow;
	I needs must think it honesty. Camillo,
	Not for Bohemia, nor the pomp that may
	Be thereat glean'd, for all the sun sees or
	The close earth wombs or the profound sea hides
	In unknown fathoms, will I break my oath
	To this my fair beloved: therefore, I pray you,
	As you have ever been my father's honour'd friend,
	When he shall miss me,--as, in faith, I mean not
	To see him any more,--cast your good counsels
	Upon his passion; let myself and fortune
	Tug for the time to come. This you may know
	And so deliver, I am put to sea
	With her whom here I cannot hold on shore;
	And most opportune to our need I have
	A vessel rides fast by, but not prepared
	For this design. What course I mean to hold
	Shall nothing benefit your knowledge, nor
	Concern me the reporting.

CAMILLO	O my lord!
	I would your spirit were easier for advice,
	Or stronger for your need.

FLORIZEL	Hark, Perdita

	[Drawing her aside]

	I'll hear you by and by.

CAMILLO	He's irremoveable,
	Resolved for flight. Now were I happy, if
	His going I could frame to serve my turn,
	Save him from danger, do him love and honour,
	Purchase the sight again of dear Sicilia
	And that unhappy king, my master, whom
	I so much thirst to see.

FLORIZEL	Now, good Camillo;
	I am so fraught with curious business that
	I leave out ceremony.

CAMILLO	Sir, I think
	You have heard of my poor services, i' the love
	That I have borne your father?

FLORIZEL	Very nobly
	Have you deserved: it is my father's music
	To speak your deeds, not little of his care
	To have them recompensed as thought on.

CAMILLO	Well, my lord,
	If you may please to think I love the king
	And through him what is nearest to him, which is
	Your gracious self, embrace but my direction:
	If your more ponderous and settled project
	May suffer alteration, on mine honour,
	I'll point you where you shall have such receiving
	As shall become your highness; where you may
	Enjoy your mistress, from the whom, I see,
	There's no disjunction to be made, but by--
	As heavens forefend!--your ruin; marry her,
	And, with my best endeavours in your absence,
	Your discontenting father strive to qualify
	And bring him up to liking.

FLORIZEL	How, Camillo,
	May this, almost a miracle, be done?
	That I may call thee something more than man
	And after that trust to thee.

CAMILLO	Have you thought on
	A place whereto you'll go?

FLORIZEL	Not any yet:
	But as the unthought-on accident is guilty
	To what we wildly do, so we profess
	Ourselves to be the slaves of chance and flies
	Of every wind that blows.

CAMILLO	Then list to me:
	This follows, if you will not change your purpose
	But undergo this flight, make for Sicilia,
	And there present yourself and your fair princess,
	For so I see she must be, 'fore Leontes:
	She shall be habited as it becomes
	The partner of your bed. Methinks I see
	Leontes opening his free arms and weeping
	His welcomes forth; asks thee the son forgiveness,
	As 'twere i' the father's person; kisses the hands
	Of your fresh princess; o'er and o'er divides him
	'Twixt his unkindness and his kindness; the one
	He chides to hell and bids the other grow
	Faster than thought or time.

FLORIZEL	Worthy Camillo,
	What colour for my visitation shall I
	Hold up before him?

CAMILLO	Sent by the king your father
	To greet him and to give him comforts. Sir,
	The manner of your bearing towards him, with
	What you as from your father shall deliver,
	Things known betwixt us three, I'll write you down:
	The which shall point you forth at every sitting
	What you must say; that he shall not perceive
	But that you have your father's bosom there
	And speak his very heart.

FLORIZEL	I am bound to you:
	There is some sap in this.

CAMILLO	A cause more promising
	Than a wild dedication of yourselves
	To unpath'd waters, undream'd shores, most certain
	To miseries enough; no hope to help you,
	But as you shake off one to take another;
	Nothing so certain as your anchors, who
	Do their best office, if they can but stay you
	Where you'll be loath to be: besides you know
	Prosperity's the very bond of love,
	Whose fresh complexion and whose heart together
	Affliction alters.

PERDITA	                  One of these is true:
	I think affliction may subdue the cheek,
	But not take in the mind.

CAMILLO	Yea, say you so?
	There shall not at your father's house these
	seven years
	Be born another such.

FLORIZEL	My good Camillo,
	She is as forward of her breeding as
	She is i' the rear our birth.

CAMILLO	I cannot say 'tis pity
	She lacks instructions, for she seems a mistress
	To most that teach.

PERDITA	Your pardon, sir; for this
	I'll blush you thanks.

FLORIZEL	My prettiest Perdita!
	But O, the thorns we stand upon! Camillo,
	Preserver of my father, now of me,
	The medicine of our house, how shall we do?
	We are not furnish'd like Bohemia's son,
	Nor shall appear in Sicilia.

CAMILLO	My lord,
	Fear none of this: I think you know my fortunes
	Do all lie there: it shall be so my care
	To have you royally appointed as if
	The scene you play were mine. For instance, sir,
	That you may know you shall not want, one word.

	[They talk aside]

	[Re-enter AUTOLYCUS]

AUTOLYCUS	Ha, ha! what a fool Honesty is! and Trust, his
	sworn brother, a very simple gentleman! I have sold
	all my trumpery; not a counterfeit stone, not a
	ribbon, glass, pomander, brooch, table-book, ballad,
	knife, tape, glove, shoe-tie, bracelet, horn-ring,
	to keep my pack from fasting: they throng who
	should buy first, as if my trinkets had been
	hallowed and brought a benediction to the buyer:
	by which means I saw whose purse was best in
	picture; and what I saw, to my good use I
	remembered. My clown, who wants but something to
	be a reasonable man, grew so in love with the
	wenches' song, that he would not stir his pettitoes
	till he had both tune and words; which so drew the
	rest of the herd to me that all their other senses
	stuck in ears: you might have pinched a placket, it
	was senseless; 'twas nothing to geld a codpiece of a
	purse; I could have filed keys off that hung in
	chains: no hearing, no feeling, but my sir's song,
	and admiring the nothing of it. So that in this
	time of lethargy I picked and cut most of their
	festival purses; and had not the old man come in
	with a whoo-bub against his daughter and the king's
	son and scared my choughs from the chaff, I had not
	left a purse alive in the whole army.

	[CAMILLO, FLORIZEL, and PERDITA come forward]

CAMILLO	Nay, but my letters, by this means being there
	So soon as you arrive, shall clear that doubt.

FLORIZEL	And those that you'll procure from King Leontes--

CAMILLO	Shall satisfy your father.

PERDITA	Happy be you!
	All that you speak shows fair.

CAMILLO	Who have we here?

	[Seeing AUTOLYCUS]

	We'll make an instrument of this, omit
	Nothing may give us aid.

AUTOLYCUS	If they have overheard me now, why, hanging.

CAMILLO	How now, good fellow! why shakest thou so? Fear
	not, man; here's no harm intended to thee.

AUTOLYCUS	I am a poor fellow, sir.

CAMILLO	Why, be so still; here's nobody will steal that from
	thee: yet for the outside of thy poverty we must
	make an exchange; therefore discase thee instantly,
	--thou must think there's a necessity in't,--and
	change garments with this gentleman: though the
	pennyworth on his side be the worst, yet hold thee,
	there's some boot.

AUTOLYCUS	I am a poor fellow, sir.

	[Aside]

		   I know ye well enough.

CAMILLO	Nay, prithee, dispatch: the gentleman is half
	flayed already.

AUTOLYCUS	Are you in earnest, sir?

	[Aside]

		   I smell the trick on't.

FLORIZEL	Dispatch, I prithee.

AUTOLYCUS	Indeed, I have had earnest: but I cannot with
	conscience take it.

CAMILLO	Unbuckle, unbuckle.

	[FLORIZEL and AUTOLYCUS exchange garments]

	Fortunate mistress,--let my prophecy
	Come home to ye!--you must retire yourself
	Into some covert: take your sweetheart's hat
	And pluck it o'er your brows, muffle your face,
	Dismantle you, and, as you can, disliken
	The truth of your own seeming; that you may--
	For I do fear eyes over--to shipboard
	Get undescried.

PERDITA	                  I see the play so lies
	That I must bear a part.

CAMILLO	No remedy.
	Have you done there?

FLORIZEL	Should I now meet my father,
	He would not call me son.

CAMILLO	Nay, you shall have no hat.

	[Giving it to PERDITA]

	Come, lady, come. Farewell, my friend.

AUTOLYCUS	Adieu, sir.

FLORIZEL	O Perdita, what have we twain forgot!
	Pray you, a word.

CAMILLO	[Aside]  What I do next, shall be to tell the king
	Of this escape and whither they are bound;
	Wherein my hope is I shall so prevail
	To force him after: in whose company
	I shall review Sicilia, for whose sight
	I have a woman's longing.

FLORIZEL	Fortune speed us!
	Thus we set on, Camillo, to the sea-side.

CAMILLO	The swifter speed the better.

	[Exeunt FLORIZEL, PERDITA, and CAMILLO]

AUTOLYCUS	I understand the business, I hear it: to have an
	open ear, a quick eye, and a nimble hand, is
	necessary for a cut-purse; a good nose is requisite
	also, to smell out work for the other senses. I see
	this is the time that the unjust man doth thrive.
	What an exchange had this been without boot! What
	a boot is here with this exchange! Sure the gods do
	this year connive at us, and we may do any thing
	extempore. The prince himself is about a piece of
	iniquity, stealing away from his father with his
	clog at his heels: if I thought it were a piece of
	honesty to acquaint the king withal, I would not
	do't: I hold it the more knavery to conceal it;
	and therein am I constant to my profession.

	[Re-enter Clown and Shepherd]

	Aside, aside; here is more matter for a hot brain:
	every lane's end, every shop, church, session,
	hanging, yields a careful man work.

Clown	See, see; what a man you are now!
	There is no other way but to tell the king
	she's a changeling and none of your flesh and blood.

Shepherd	Nay, but hear me.

Clown	Nay, but hear me.

Shepherd	Go to, then.

Clown	She being none of your flesh and blood, your flesh
	and blood has not offended the king; and so your
	flesh and blood is not to be punished by him. Show
	those things you found about her, those secret
	things, all but what she has with her: this being
	done, let the law go whistle: I warrant you.

Shepherd	I will tell the king all, every word, yea, and his
	son's pranks too; who, I may say, is no honest man,
	neither to his father nor to me, to go about to make
	me the king's brother-in-law.

Clown	Indeed, brother-in-law was the farthest off you
	could have been to him and then your blood had been
	the dearer by I know how much an ounce.

AUTOLYCUS	[Aside]  Very wisely, puppies!

Shepherd	Well, let us to the king: there is that in this
	fardel will make him scratch his beard.

AUTOLYCUS	[Aside]  I know not what impediment this complaint
	may be to the flight of my master.

Clown	Pray heartily he be at palace.

AUTOLYCUS	[Aside]  Though I am not naturally honest, I am so
	sometimes by chance: let me pocket up my pedlar's excrement.

	[Takes off his false beard]

	How now, rustics! whither are you bound?

Shepherd	To the palace, an it like your worship.

AUTOLYCUS	Your affairs there, what, with whom, the condition
	of that fardel, the place of your dwelling, your
	names, your ages, of what having, breeding, and any
	thing that is fitting to be known, discover.

Clown	We are but plain fellows, sir.

AUTOLYCUS	A lie; you are rough and hairy. Let me have no
	lying: it becomes none but tradesmen, and they
	often give us soldiers the lie: but we pay them for
	it with stamped coin, not stabbing steel; therefore
	they do not give us the lie.

Clown	Your worship had like to have given us one, if you
	had not taken yourself with the manner.

Shepherd	Are you a courtier, an't like you, sir?

AUTOLYCUS	Whether it like me or no, I am a courtier. Seest
	thou not the air of the court in these enfoldings?
	hath not my gait in it the measure of the court?
	receives not thy nose court-odor from me? reflect I
	not on thy baseness court-contempt? Thinkest thou,
	for that I insinuate, or toaze from thee thy
	business, I am therefore no courtier? I am courtier
	cap-a-pe; and one that will either push on or pluck
	back thy business there: whereupon I command thee to
	open thy affair.

Shepherd	My business, sir, is to the king.

AUTOLYCUS	What advocate hast thou to him?

Shepherd	I know not, an't like you.

Clown	Advocate's the court-word for a pheasant: say you
	have none.

Shepherd	None, sir; I have no pheasant, cock nor hen.

AUTOLYCUS	How blessed are we that are not simple men!
	Yet nature might have made me as these are,
	Therefore I will not disdain.

Clown	This cannot be but a great courtier.

Shepherd	His garments are rich, but he wears
	them not handsomely.

Clown	He seems to be the more noble in being fantastical:
	a great man, I'll warrant; I know by the picking
	on's teeth.

AUTOLYCUS	The fardel there? what's i' the fardel?
	Wherefore that box?

Shepherd	Sir, there lies such secrets in this fardel and box,
	which none must know but the king; and which he
	shall know within this hour, if I may come to the
	speech of him.

AUTOLYCUS	Age, thou hast lost thy labour.

Shepherd	Why, sir?

AUTOLYCUS	The king is not at the palace; he is gone aboard a
	new ship to purge melancholy and air himself: for,
	if thou beest capable of things serious, thou must
	know the king is full of grief.

Shepard	So 'tis said, sir; about his son, that should have
	married a shepherd's daughter.

AUTOLYCUS	If that shepherd be not in hand-fast, let him fly:
	the curses he shall have, the tortures he shall
	feel, will break the back of man, the heart of monster.

Clown	Think you so, sir?

AUTOLYCUS	Not he alone shall suffer what wit can make heavy
	and vengeance bitter; but those that are germane to
	him, though removed fifty times, shall all come
	under the hangman: which though it be great pity,
	yet it is necessary. An old sheep-whistling rogue a
	ram-tender, to offer to have his daughter come into
	grace! Some say he shall be stoned; but that death
	is too soft for him, say I	draw our throne into a
	sheep-cote! all deaths are too few, the sharpest too easy.

Clown	Has the old man e'er a son, sir, do you hear. an't
	like you, sir?

AUTOLYCUS	He has a son, who shall be flayed alive; then
	'nointed over with honey, set on the head of a
	wasp's nest; then stand till he be three quarters
	and a dram dead; then recovered again with
	aqua-vitae or some other hot infusion; then, raw as
	he is, and in the hottest day prognostication
	proclaims, shall be be set against a brick-wall, the
	sun looking with a southward eye upon him, where he
	is to behold him with flies blown to death. But what
	talk we of these traitorly rascals, whose miseries
	are to be smiled at, their offences being so
	capital? Tell me, for you seem to be honest plain
	men, what you have to the king: being something
	gently considered, I'll bring you where he is
	aboard, tender your persons to his presence,
	whisper him in your behalfs; and if it be in man
	besides the king to effect your suits, here is man
	shall do it.

Clown	He seems to be of great authority: close with him,
	give him gold; and though authority be a stubborn
	bear, yet he is oft led by the nose with gold: show
	the inside of your purse to the outside of his hand,
	and no more ado. Remember 'stoned,' and 'flayed alive.'

Shepherd	An't please you, sir, to undertake the business for
	us, here is that gold I have: I'll make it as much
	more and leave this young man in pawn till I bring it you.

AUTOLYCUS	After I have done what I promised?

Shepherd	Ay, sir.

AUTOLYCUS	Well, give me the moiety. Are you a party in this business?

Clown	In some sort, sir: but though my case be a pitiful
	one, I hope I shall not be flayed out of it.

AUTOLYCUS	O, that's the case of the shepherd's son: hang him,
	he'll be made an example.

Clown	Comfort, good comfort! We must to the king and show
	our strange sights: he must know 'tis none of your
	daughter nor my sister; we are gone else. Sir, I
	will give you as much as this old man does when the
	business is performed, and remain, as he says, your
	pawn till it be brought you.

AUTOLYCUS	I will trust you. Walk before toward the sea-side;
	go on the right hand: I will but look upon the
	hedge and follow you.

Clown	We are blest in this man, as I may say, even blest.

Shepherd	Let's before as he bids us: he was provided to do us good.

	[Exeunt Shepherd and Clown]

AUTOLYCUS	If I had a mind to be honest, I see Fortune would
	not suffer me: she drops booties in my mouth. I am
	courted now with a double occasion, gold and a means
	to do the prince my master good; which who knows how
	that may turn back to my advancement? I will bring
	these two moles, these blind ones, aboard him: if he
	think it fit to shore them again and that the
	complaint they have to the king concerns him
	nothing, let him call me rogue for being so far
	officious; for I am proof against that title and
	what shame else belongs to't. To him will I present
	them: there may be matter in it.

	[Exit]




	THE WINTER'S TALE


ACT V



SCENE I	A room in LEONTES' palace.


	[Enter LEONTES, CLEOMENES, DION, PAULINA, and Servants]

CLEOMENES	Sir, you have done enough, and have perform'd
	A saint-like sorrow: no fault could you make,
	Which you have not redeem'd; indeed, paid down
	More penitence than done trespass: at the last,
	Do as the heavens have done, forget your evil;
	With them forgive yourself.

LEONTES	Whilst I remember
	Her and her virtues, I cannot forget
	My blemishes in them, and so still think of
	The wrong I did myself; which was so much,
	That heirless it hath made my kingdom and
	Destroy'd the sweet'st companion that e'er man
	Bred his hopes out of.

PAULINA	True, too true, my lord:
	If, one by one, you wedded all the world,
	Or from the all that are took something good,
	To make a perfect woman, she you kill'd
	Would be unparallel'd.

LEONTES	I think so. Kill'd!
	She I kill'd! I did so: but thou strikest me
	Sorely, to say I did; it is as bitter
	Upon thy tongue as in my thought: now, good now,
	Say so but seldom.

CLEOMENES	                  Not at all, good lady:
	You might have spoken a thousand things that would
	Have done the time more benefit and graced
	Your kindness better.

PAULINA	You are one of those
	Would have him wed again.

DION	If you would not so,
	You pity not the state, nor the remembrance
	Of his most sovereign name; consider little
	What dangers, by his highness' fail of issue,
	May drop upon his kingdom and devour
	Incertain lookers on. What were more holy
	Than to rejoice the former queen is well?
	What holier than, for royalty's repair,
	For present comfort and for future good,
	To bless the bed of majesty again
	With a sweet fellow to't?

PAULINA	There is none worthy,
	Respecting her that's gone. Besides, the gods
	Will have fulfill'd their secret purposes;
	For has not the divine Apollo said,
	Is't not the tenor of his oracle,
	That King Leontes shall not have an heir
	Till his lost child be found? which that it shall,
	Is all as monstrous to our human reason
	As my Antigonus to break his grave
	And come again to me; who, on my life,
	Did perish with the infant. 'Tis your counsel
	My lord should to the heavens be contrary,
	Oppose against their wills.

	[To LEONTES]

		      Care not for issue;
	The crown will find an heir: great Alexander
	Left his to the worthiest; so his successor
	Was like to be the best.

LEONTES	Good Paulina,
	Who hast the memory of Hermione,
	I know, in honour, O, that ever I
	Had squared me to thy counsel! then, even now,
	I might have look'd upon my queen's full eyes,
	Have taken treasure from her lips--

PAULINA	And left them
	More rich for what they yielded.

LEONTES	Thou speak'st truth.
	No more such wives; therefore, no wife: one worse,
	And better used, would make her sainted spirit
	Again possess her corpse, and on this stage,
	Where we're offenders now, appear soul-vex'd,
	And begin, 'Why to me?'

PAULINA	Had she such power,
	She had just cause.

LEONTES	She had; and would incense me
	To murder her I married.

PAULINA	I should so.
	Were I the ghost that walk'd, I'ld bid you mark
	Her eye, and tell me for what dull part in't
	You chose her; then I'ld shriek, that even your ears
	Should rift to hear me; and the words that follow'd
	Should be 'Remember mine.'

LEONTES	Stars, stars,
	And all eyes else dead coals! Fear thou no wife;
	I'll have no wife, Paulina.

PAULINA	Will you swear
	Never to marry but by my free leave?

LEONTES	Never, Paulina; so be blest my spirit!

PAULINA	Then, good my lords, bear witness to his oath.

CLEOMENES	You tempt him over-much.

PAULINA	Unless another,
	As like Hermione as is her picture,
	Affront his eye.

CLEOMENES	                  Good madam,--

PAULINA	I have done.
	Yet, if my lord will marry,--if you will, sir,
	No remedy, but you will,--give me the office
	To choose you a queen: she shall not be so young
	As was your former; but she shall be such
	As, walk'd your first queen's ghost,
	it should take joy
	To see her in your arms.

LEONTES	My true Paulina,
	We shall not marry till thou bid'st us.

PAULINA	That
	Shall be when your first queen's again in breath;
	Never till then.

	[Enter a Gentleman]

Gentleman	One that gives out himself Prince Florizel,
	Son of Polixenes, with his princess, she
	The fairest I have yet beheld, desires access
	To your high presence.

LEONTES	What with him? he comes not
	Like to his father's greatness: his approach,
	So out of circumstance and sudden, tells us
	'Tis not a visitation framed, but forced
	By need and accident. What train?

Gentleman	But few,
	And those but mean.

LEONTES	His princess, say you, with him?

Gentleman	Ay, the most peerless piece of earth, I think,
	That e'er the sun shone bright on.

PAULINA	O Hermione,
	As every present time doth boast itself
	Above a better gone, so must thy grave
	Give way to what's seen now! Sir, you yourself
	Have said and writ so, but your writing now
	Is colder than that theme, 'She had not been,
	Nor was not to be equall'd;'--thus your verse
	Flow'd with her beauty once: 'tis shrewdly ebb'd,
	To say you have seen a better.

Gentleman	Pardon, madam:
	The one I have almost forgot,--your pardon,--
	The other, when she has obtain'd your eye,
	Will have your tongue too. This is a creature,
	Would she begin a sect, might quench the zeal
	Of all professors else, make proselytes
	Of who she but bid follow.

PAULINA	How! not women?

Gentleman	Women will love her, that she is a woman
	More worth than any man; men, that she is
	The rarest of all women.

LEONTES	Go, Cleomenes;
	Yourself, assisted with your honour'd friends,
	Bring them to our embracement. Still, 'tis strange

	[Exeunt CLEOMENES and others]

	He thus should steal upon us.

PAULINA	Had our prince,
	Jewel of children, seen this hour, he had pair'd
	Well with this lord: there was not full a month
	Between their births.

LEONTES	Prithee, no more; cease; thou know'st
	He dies to me again when talk'd of: sure,
	When I shall see this gentleman, thy speeches
	Will bring me to consider that which may
	Unfurnish me of reason. They are come.

	[Re-enter CLEOMENES and others, with FLORIZEL and PERDITA]

	Your mother was most true to wedlock, prince;
	For she did print your royal father off,
	Conceiving you: were I but twenty-one,
	Your father's image is so hit in you,
	His very air, that I should call you brother,
	As I did him, and speak of something wildly
	By us perform'd before. Most dearly welcome!
	And your fair princess,--goddess!--O, alas!
	I lost a couple, that 'twixt heaven and earth
	Might thus have stood begetting wonder as
	You, gracious couple, do: and then I lost--
	All mine own folly--the society,
	Amity too, of your brave father, whom,
	Though bearing misery, I desire my life
	Once more to look on him.

FLORIZEL	By his command
	Have I here touch'd Sicilia and from him
	Give you all greetings that a king, at friend,
	Can send his brother: and, but infirmity
	Which waits upon worn times hath something seized
	His wish'd ability, he had himself
	The lands and waters 'twixt your throne and his
	Measured to look upon you; whom he loves--
	He bade me say so--more than all the sceptres
	And those that bear them living.

LEONTES	O my brother,
	Good gentleman! the wrongs I have done thee stir
	Afresh within me, and these thy offices,
	So rarely kind, are as interpreters
	Of my behind-hand slackness. Welcome hither,
	As is the spring to the earth. And hath he too
	Exposed this paragon to the fearful usage,
	At least ungentle, of the dreadful Neptune,
	To greet a man not worth her pains, much less
	The adventure of her person?

FLORIZEL	Good my lord,
	She came from Libya.

LEONTES	Where the warlike Smalus,
	That noble honour'd lord, is fear'd and loved?

FLORIZEL	Most royal sir, from thence; from him, whose daughter
	His tears proclaim'd his, parting with her: thence,
	A prosperous south-wind friendly, we have cross'd,
	To execute the charge my father gave me
	For visiting your highness: my best train
	I have from your Sicilian shores dismiss'd;
	Who for Bohemia bend, to signify
	Not only my success in Libya, sir,
	But my arrival and my wife's in safety
	Here where we are.

LEONTES	                  The blessed gods
	Purge all infection from our air whilst you
	Do climate here! You have a holy father,
	A graceful gentleman; against whose person,
	So sacred as it is, I have done sin:
	For which the heavens, taking angry note,
	Have left me issueless; and your father's blest,
	As he from heaven merits it, with you
	Worthy his goodness. What might I have been,
	Might I a son and daughter now have look'd on,
	Such goodly things as you!

	[Enter a Lord]

Lord	Most noble sir,
	That which I shall report will bear no credit,
	Were not the proof so nigh. Please you, great sir,
	Bohemia greets you from himself by me;
	Desires you to attach his son, who has--
	His dignity and duty both cast off--
	Fled from his father, from his hopes, and with
	A shepherd's daughter.

LEONTES	Where's Bohemia? speak.

Lord	Here in your city; I now came from him:
	I speak amazedly; and it becomes
	My marvel and my message. To your court
	Whiles he was hastening, in the chase, it seems,
	Of this fair couple, meets he on the way
	The father of this seeming lady and
	Her brother, having both their country quitted
	With this young prince.

FLORIZEL	Camillo has betray'd me;
	Whose honour and whose honesty till now
	Endured all weathers.

Lord	Lay't so to his charge:
	He's with the king your father.

LEONTES	Who? Camillo?

Lord	Camillo, sir; I spake with him; who now
	Has these poor men in question. Never saw I
	Wretches so quake: they kneel, they kiss the earth;
	Forswear themselves as often as they speak:
	Bohemia stops his ears, and threatens them
	With divers deaths in death.

PERDITA	O my poor father!
	The heaven sets spies upon us, will not have
	Our contract celebrated.

LEONTES	You are married?

FLORIZEL	We are not, sir, nor are we like to be;
	The stars, I see, will kiss the valleys first:
	The odds for high and low's alike.

LEONTES	My lord,
	Is this the daughter of a king?

FLORIZEL	She is,
	When once she is my wife.

LEONTES	That 'once' I see by your good father's speed
	Will come on very slowly. I am sorry,
	Most sorry, you have broken from his liking
	Where you were tied in duty, and as sorry
	Your choice is not so rich in worth as beauty,
	That you might well enjoy her.

FLORIZEL	Dear, look up:
	Though Fortune, visible an enemy,
	Should chase us with my father, power no jot
	Hath she to change our loves. Beseech you, sir,
	Remember since you owed no more to time
	Than I do now: with thought of such affections,
	Step forth mine advocate; at your request
	My father will grant precious things as trifles.

LEONTES	Would he do so, I'ld beg your precious mistress,
	Which he counts but a trifle.

PAULINA	Sir, my liege,
	Your eye hath too much youth in't: not a month
	'Fore your queen died, she was more worth such gazes
	Than what you look on now.

LEONTES	I thought of her,
	Even in these looks I made.

	[To FLORIZEL]

		       But your petition
	Is yet unanswer'd. I will to your father:
	Your honour not o'erthrown by your desires,
	I am friend to them and you: upon which errand
	I now go toward him; therefore follow me
	And mark what way I make: come, good my lord.

	[Exeunt]




	THE WINTER'S TALE


ACT V



SCENE II	Before LEONTES' palace.


	[Enter AUTOLYCUS and a Gentleman]

AUTOLYCUS	Beseech you, sir, were you present at this relation?

First Gentleman	I was by at the opening of the fardel, heard the old
	shepherd deliver the manner how he found it:
	whereupon, after a little amazedness, we were all
	commanded out of the chamber; only this methought I
	heard the shepherd say, he found the child.

AUTOLYCUS	I would most gladly know the issue of it.

First Gentleman	I make a broken delivery of the business; but the
	changes I perceived in the king and Camillo were
	very notes of admiration: they seemed almost, with
	staring on one another, to tear the cases of their
	eyes; there was speech in their dumbness, language
	in their very gesture; they looked as they had heard
	of a world ransomed, or one destroyed: a notable
	passion of wonder appeared in them; but the wisest
	beholder, that knew no more but seeing, could not
	say if the importance were joy or sorrow; but in the
	extremity of the one, it must needs be.

	[Enter another Gentleman]

	Here comes a gentleman that haply knows more.
	The news, Rogero?

Second Gentleman	Nothing but bonfires: the oracle is fulfilled; the
	king's daughter is found: such a deal of wonder is
	broken out within this hour that ballad-makers
	cannot be able to express it.

	[Enter a third Gentleman]

	Here comes the Lady Paulina's steward: he can
	deliver you more. How goes it now, sir? this news
	which is called true is so like an old tale, that
	the verity of it is in strong suspicion: has the king
	found his heir?

Third Gentleman	Most true, if ever truth were pregnant by
	circumstance: that which you hear you'll swear you
	see, there is such unity in the proofs. The mantle
	of Queen Hermione's, her jewel about the neck of it,
	the letters of Antigonus found with it which they
	know to be his character, the majesty of the
	creature in resemblance of the mother, the affection
	of nobleness which nature shows above her breeding,
	and many other evidences proclaim her with all
	certainty to be the king's daughter. Did you see
	the meeting of the two kings?

Second Gentleman	No.

Third Gentleman	Then have you lost a sight, which was to be seen,
	cannot be spoken of. There might you have beheld one
	joy crown another, so and in such manner that it
	seemed sorrow wept to take leave of them, for their
	joy waded in tears. There was casting up of eyes,
	holding up of hands, with countenances of such
	distraction that they were to be known by garment,
	not by favour. Our king, being ready to leap out of
	himself for joy of his found daughter, as if that
	joy were now become a loss, cries 'O, thy mother,
	thy mother!' then asks Bohemia forgiveness; then
	embraces his son-in-law; then again worries he his
	daughter with clipping her; now he thanks the old
	shepherd, which stands by like a weather-bitten
	conduit of many kings' reigns. I never heard of such
	another encounter, which lames report to follow it
	and undoes description to do it.

Second Gentleman	What, pray you, became of Antigonus, that carried
	hence the child?

Third Gentleman	Like an old tale still, which will have matter to
	rehearse, though credit be asleep and not an ear
	open. He was torn to pieces with a bear: this
	avouches the shepherd's son; who has not only his
	innocence, which seems much, to justify him, but a
	handkerchief and rings of his that Paulina knows.

First Gentleman	What became of his bark and his followers?

Third Gentleman	Wrecked the same instant of their master's death and
	in the view of the shepherd: so that all the
	instruments which aided to expose the child were
	even then lost when it was found. But O, the noble
	combat that 'twixt joy and sorrow was fought in
	Paulina! She had one eye declined for the loss of
	her husband, another elevated that the oracle was
	fulfilled: she lifted the princess from the earth,
	and so locks her in embracing, as if she would pin
	her to her heart that she might no more be in danger
	of losing.

First Gentleman	The dignity of this act was worth the audience of
	kings and princes; for by such was it acted.

Third Gentleman	One of the prettiest touches of all and that which
	angled for mine eyes, caught the water though not
	the fish, was when, at the relation of the queen's
	death, with the manner how she came to't bravely
	confessed and lamented by the king, how
	attentiveness wounded his daughter; till, from one
	sign of dolour to another, she did, with an 'Alas,'
	I would fain say, bleed tears, for I am sure my
	heart wept blood. Who was most marble there changed
	colour; some swooned, all sorrowed: if all the world
	could have seen 't, the woe had been universal.

First Gentleman	Are they returned to the court?

Third Gentleman	No: the princess hearing of her mother's statue,
	which is in the keeping of Paulina,--a piece many
	years in doing and now newly performed by that rare
	Italian master, Julio Romano, who, had he himself
	eternity and could put breath into his work, would
	beguile Nature of her custom, so perfectly he is her
	ape: he so near to Hermione hath done Hermione that
	they say one would speak to her and stand in hope of
	answer: thither with all greediness of affection
	are they gone, and there they intend to sup.

Second Gentleman	I thought she had some great matter there in hand;
	for she hath privately twice or thrice a day, ever
	since the death of Hermione, visited that removed
	house. Shall we thither and with our company piece
	the rejoicing?

First Gentleman	Who would be thence that has the benefit of access?
	every wink of an eye some new grace will be born:
	our absence makes us unthrifty to our knowledge.
	Let's along.

	[Exeunt Gentlemen]

AUTOLYCUS	Now, had I not the dash of my former life in me,
	would preferment drop on my head. I brought the old
	man and his son aboard the prince: told him I heard
	them talk of a fardel and I know not what: but he
	at that time, overfond of the shepherd's daughter,
	so he then took her to be, who began to be much
	sea-sick, and himself little better, extremity of
	weather continuing, this mystery remained
	undiscovered. But 'tis all one to me; for had I
	been the finder out of this secret, it would not
	have relished among my other discredits.

	[Enter Shepherd and Clown]

	Here come those I have done good to against my will,
	and already appearing in the blossoms of their fortune.

Shepherd	Come, boy; I am past moe children, but thy sons and
	daughters will be all gentlemen born.

Clown	You are well met, sir. You denied to fight with me
	this other day, because I was no gentleman born.
	See you these clothes? say you see them not and
	think me still no gentleman born: you were best say
	these robes are not gentlemen born: give me the
	lie, do, and try whether I am not now a gentleman born.

AUTOLYCUS	I know you are now, sir, a gentleman born.

Clown	Ay, and have been so any time these four hours.

Shepherd	And so have I, boy.

Clown	So you have: but I was a gentleman born before my
	father; for the king's son took me by the hand, and
	called me brother; and then the two kings called my
	father brother; and then the prince my brother and
	the princess my sister called my father father; and
	so we wept, and there was the first gentleman-like
	tears that ever we shed.

Shepherd	We may live, son, to shed many more.

Clown	Ay; or else 'twere hard luck, being in so
	preposterous estate as we are.

AUTOLYCUS	I humbly beseech you, sir, to pardon me all the
	faults I have committed to your worship and to give
	me your good report to the prince my master.

Shepherd	Prithee, son, do; for we must be gentle, now we are
	gentlemen.

Clown	Thou wilt amend thy life?

AUTOLYCUS	Ay, an it like your good worship.

Clown	Give me thy hand: I will swear to the prince thou
	art as honest a true fellow as any is in Bohemia.

Shepherd	You may say it, but not swear it.

Clown	Not swear it, now I am a gentleman? Let boors and
	franklins say it, I'll swear it.

Shepherd	How if it be false, son?

Clown	If it be ne'er so false, a true gentleman may swear
	it in the behalf of his friend: and I'll swear to
	the prince thou art a tall fellow of thy hands and
	that thou wilt not be drunk; but I know thou art no
	tall fellow of thy hands and that thou wilt be
	drunk: but I'll swear it, and I would thou wouldst
	be a tall fellow of thy hands.

AUTOLYCUS	I will prove so, sir, to my power.

Clown	Ay, by any means prove a tall fellow: if I do not
	wonder how thou darest venture to be drunk, not
	being a tall fellow, trust me not. Hark! the kings
	and the princes, our kindred, are going to see the
	queen's picture. Come, follow us: we'll be thy
	good masters.

	[Exeunt]




	THE WINTER'S TALE


ACT V



SCENE III	A chapel in PAULINA'S house.


	[Enter LEONTES, POLIXENES, FLORIZEL, PERDITA,
	CAMILLO, PAULINA, Lords, and Attendants]

LEONTES	O grave and good Paulina, the great comfort
	That I have had of thee!

PAULINA	What, sovereign sir,
	I did not well I meant well. All my services
	You have paid home: but that you have vouchsafed,
	With your crown'd brother and these your contracted
	Heirs of your kingdoms, my poor house to visit,
	It is a surplus of your grace, which never
	My life may last to answer.

LEONTES	O Paulina,
	We honour you with trouble: but we came
	To see the statue of our queen: your gallery
	Have we pass'd through, not without much content
	In many singularities; but we saw not
	That which my daughter came to look upon,
	The statue of her mother.

PAULINA	As she lived peerless,
	So her dead likeness, I do well believe,
	Excels whatever yet you look'd upon
	Or hand of man hath done; therefore I keep it
	Lonely, apart. But here it is: prepare
	To see the life as lively mock'd as ever
	Still sleep mock'd death: behold, and say 'tis well.

	[PAULINA draws a curtain, and discovers HERMIONE
	standing like a statue]

	I like your silence, it the more shows off
	Your wonder: but yet speak; first, you, my liege,
	Comes it not something near?

LEONTES	Her natural posture!
	Chide me, dear stone, that I may say indeed
	Thou art Hermione; or rather, thou art she
	In thy not chiding, for she was as tender
	As infancy and grace. But yet, Paulina,
	Hermione was not so much wrinkled, nothing
	So aged as this seems.

POLIXENES	O, not by much.

PAULINA	So much the more our carver's excellence;
	Which lets go by some sixteen years and makes her
	As she lived now.

LEONTES	                  As now she might have done,
	So much to my good comfort, as it is
	Now piercing to my soul. O, thus she stood,
	Even with such life of majesty, warm life,
	As now it coldly stands, when first I woo'd her!
	I am ashamed: does not the stone rebuke me
	For being more stone than it? O royal piece,
	There's magic in thy majesty, which has
	My evils conjured to remembrance and
	From thy admiring daughter took the spirits,
	Standing like stone with thee.

PERDITA	And give me leave,
	And do not say 'tis superstition, that
	I kneel and then implore her blessing. Lady,
	Dear queen, that ended when I but began,
	Give me that hand of yours to kiss.

PAULINA	O, patience!
	The statue is but newly fix'd, the colour's Not dry.

CAMILLO	My lord, your sorrow was too sore laid on,
	Which sixteen winters cannot blow away,
	So many summers dry; scarce any joy
	Did ever so long live; no sorrow
	But kill'd itself much sooner.

POLIXENES	Dear my brother,
	Let him that was the cause of this have power
	To take off so much grief from you as he
	Will piece up in himself.

PAULINA	Indeed, my lord,
	If I had thought the sight of my poor image
	Would thus have wrought you,--for the stone is mine--
	I'ld not have show'd it.

LEONTES	Do not draw the curtain.

PAULINA	No longer shall you gaze on't, lest your fancy
	May think anon it moves.

LEONTES	Let be, let be.
	Would I were dead, but that, methinks, already--
	What was he that did make it? See, my lord,
	Would you not deem it breathed? and that those veins
	Did verily bear blood?

POLIXENES	Masterly done:
	The very life seems warm upon her lip.

LEONTES	The fixture of her eye has motion in't,
	As we are mock'd with art.

PAULINA	I'll draw the curtain:
	My lord's almost so far transported that
	He'll think anon it lives.

LEONTES	O sweet Paulina,
	Make me to think so twenty years together!
	No settled senses of the world can match
	The pleasure of that madness. Let 't alone.

PAULINA	I am sorry, sir, I have thus far stirr'd you: but
	I could afflict you farther.

LEONTES	Do, Paulina;
	For this affliction has a taste as sweet
	As any cordial comfort. Still, methinks,
	There is an air comes from her: what fine chisel
	Could ever yet cut breath? Let no man mock me,
	For I will kiss her.

PAULINA	Good my lord, forbear:
	The ruddiness upon her lip is wet;
	You'll mar it if you kiss it, stain your own
	With oily painting. Shall I draw the curtain?

LEONTES	No, not these twenty years.

PERDITA	So long could I
	Stand by, a looker on.

PAULINA	Either forbear,
	Quit presently the chapel, or resolve you
	For more amazement. If you can behold it,
	I'll make the statue move indeed, descend
	And take you by the hand; but then you'll think--
	Which I protest against--I am assisted
	By wicked powers.

LEONTES	                  What you can make her do,
	I am content to look on: what to speak,
	I am content to hear; for 'tis as easy
	To make her speak as move.

PAULINA	It is required
	You do awake your faith. Then all stand still;
	On: those that think it is unlawful business
	I am about, let them depart.

LEONTES	Proceed:
	No foot shall stir.

PAULINA	Music, awake her; strike!

	[Music]

	'Tis time; descend; be stone no more; approach;
	Strike all that look upon with marvel. Come,
	I'll fill your grave up: stir, nay, come away,
	Bequeath to death your numbness, for from him
	Dear life redeems you. You perceive she stirs:

	[HERMIONE comes down]

	Start not; her actions shall be holy as
	You hear my spell is lawful: do not shun her
	Until you see her die again; for then
	You kill her double. Nay, present your hand:
	When she was young you woo'd her; now in age
	Is she become the suitor?

LEONTES	O, she's warm!
	If this be magic, let it be an art
	Lawful as eating.

POLIXENES	                  She embraces him.

CAMILLO	She hangs about his neck:
	If she pertain to life let her speak too.

POLIXENES	Ay, and make't manifest where she has lived,
	Or how stolen from the dead.

PAULINA	That she is living,
	Were it but told you, should be hooted at
	Like an old tale: but it appears she lives,
	Though yet she speak not. Mark a little while.
	Please you to interpose, fair madam: kneel
	And pray your mother's blessing. Turn, good lady;
	Our Perdita is found.

HERMIONE	You gods, look down
	And from your sacred vials pour your graces
	Upon my daughter's head! Tell me, mine own.
	Where hast thou been preserved? where lived? how found
	Thy father's court? for thou shalt hear that I,
	Knowing by Paulina that the oracle
	Gave hope thou wast in being, have preserved
	Myself to see the issue.

PAULINA	There's time enough for that;
	Lest they desire upon this push to trouble
	Your joys with like relation. Go together,
	You precious winners all; your exultation
	Partake to every one. I, an old turtle,
	Will wing me to some wither'd bough and there
	My mate, that's never to be found again,
	Lament till I am lost.

LEONTES	O, peace, Paulina!
	Thou shouldst a husband take by my consent,
	As I by thine a wife: this is a match,
	And made between's by vows. Thou hast found mine;
	But how, is to be question'd; for I saw her,
	As I thought, dead, and have in vain said many
	A prayer upon her grave. I'll not seek far--
	For him, I partly know his mind--to find thee
	An honourable husband. Come, Camillo,
	And take her by the hand, whose worth and honesty
	Is richly noted and here justified
	By us, a pair of kings. Let's from this place.
	What! look upon my brother: both your pardons,
	That e'er I put between your holy looks
	My ill suspicion. This is your son-in-law,
	And son unto the king, who, heavens directing,
	Is troth-plight to your daughter. Good Paulina,
	Lead us from hence, where we may leisurely
	Each one demand an answer to his part
	Perform'd in this wide gap of time since first
	We were dissever'd: hastily lead away.

	[Exeunt]


	SONNETS



TO THE ONLY BEGETTER OF
THESE INSUING SONNETS
MR. W. H. ALL HAPPINESS
AND THAT ETERNITY
PROMISED BY
OUR EVER-LIVING POET WISHETH
THE WELL-WISHING
ADVENTURER IN
SETTING FORTH
T. T.


I.

FROM fairest creatures we desire increase,
That thereby beauty's rose might never die,
But as the riper should by time decease,
His tender heir might bear his memory:
But thou, contracted to thine own bright eyes,
Feed'st thy light'st flame with self-substantial fuel,
Making a famine where abundance lies,
Thyself thy foe, to thy sweet self too cruel.
Thou that art now the world's fresh ornament
And only herald to the gaudy spring,
Within thine own bud buriest thy content
And, tender churl, makest waste in niggarding.
  Pity the world, or else this glutton be,
  To eat the world's due, by the grave and thee.

II.

When forty winters shall beseige thy brow,
And dig deep trenches in thy beauty's field,
Thy youth's proud livery, so gazed on now,
Will be a tatter'd weed, of small worth held:
Then being ask'd where all thy beauty lies,
Where all the treasure of thy lusty days,
To say, within thine own deep-sunken eyes,
Were an all-eating shame and thriftless praise.
How much more praise deserved thy beauty's use,
If thou couldst answer 'This fair child of mine
Shall sum my count and make my old excuse,'
Proving his beauty by succession thine!
  This were to be new made when thou art old,
  And see thy blood warm when thou feel'st it cold.

III.

Look in thy glass, and tell the face thou viewest
Now is the time that face should form another;
Whose fresh repair if now thou not renewest,
Thou dost beguile the world, unbless some mother.
For where is she so fair whose unear'd womb
Disdains the tillage of thy husbandry?
Or who is he so fond will be the tomb
Of his self-love, to stop posterity?
Thou art thy mother's glass, and she in thee
Calls back the lovely April of her prime:
So thou through windows of thine age shall see
Despite of wrinkles this thy golden time.
  But if thou live, remember'd not to be,
  Die single, and thine image dies with thee.

IV.

Unthrifty loveliness, why dost thou spend
Upon thyself thy beauty's legacy?
Nature's bequest gives nothing but doth lend,
And being frank she lends to those are free.
Then, beauteous niggard, why dost thou abuse
The bounteous largess given thee to give?
Profitless usurer, why dost thou use
So great a sum of sums, yet canst not live?
For having traffic with thyself alone,
Thou of thyself thy sweet self dost deceive.
Then how, when nature calls thee to be gone,
What acceptable audit canst thou leave?
  Thy unused beauty must be tomb'd with thee,
  Which, used, lives th' executor to be.

V.

Those hours, that with gentle work did frame
The lovely gaze where every eye doth dwell,
Will play the tyrants to the very same
And that unfair which fairly doth excel:
For never-resting time leads summer on
To hideous winter and confounds him there;
Sap cheque'd with frost and lusty leaves quite gone,
Beauty o'ersnow'd and bareness every where:
Then, were not summer's distillation left,
A liquid prisoner pent in walls of glass,
Beauty's effect with beauty were bereft,
Nor it nor no remembrance what it was:
  But flowers distill'd though they with winter meet,
  Leese but their show; their substance still lives sweet.

VI.

Then let not winter's ragged hand deface
In thee thy summer, ere thou be distill'd:
Make sweet some vial; treasure thou some place
With beauty's treasure, ere it be self-kill'd.
That use is not forbidden usury,
Which happies those that pay the willing loan;
That's for thyself to breed another thee,
Or ten times happier, be it ten for one;
Ten times thyself were happier than thou art,
If ten of thine ten times refigured thee:
Then what could death do, if thou shouldst depart,
Leaving thee living in posterity?
  Be not self-will'd, for thou art much too fair
  To be death's conquest and make worms thine heir.

VII.

Lo! in the orient when the gracious light
Lifts up his burning head, each under eye
Doth homage to his new-appearing sight,
Serving with looks his sacred majesty;
And having climb'd the steep-up heavenly hill,
Resembling strong youth in his middle age,
yet mortal looks adore his beauty still,
Attending on his golden pilgrimage;
But when from highmost pitch, with weary car,
Like feeble age, he reeleth from the day,
The eyes, 'fore duteous, now converted are
From his low tract and look another way:
  So thou, thyself out-going in thy noon,
  Unlook'd on diest, unless thou get a son.

VIII.

Music to hear, why hear'st thou music sadly?
Sweets with sweets war not, joy delights in joy.
Why lovest thou that which thou receivest not gladly,
Or else receivest with pleasure thine annoy?
If the true concord of well-tuned sounds,
By unions married, do offend thine ear,
They do but sweetly chide thee, who confounds
In singleness the parts that thou shouldst bear.
Mark how one string, sweet husband to another,
Strikes each in each by mutual ordering,
Resembling sire and child and happy mother
Who all in one, one pleasing note do sing:
  Whose speechless song, being many, seeming one,
  Sings this to thee: 'thou single wilt prove none.'

IX.

Is it for fear to wet a widow's eye
That thou consumest thyself in single life?
Ah! if thou issueless shalt hap to die.
The world will wail thee, like a makeless wife;
The world will be thy widow and still weep
That thou no form of thee hast left behind,
When every private widow well may keep
By children's eyes her husband's shape in mind.
Look, what an unthrift in the world doth spend
Shifts but his place, for still the world enjoys it;
But beauty's waste hath in the world an end,
And kept unused, the user so destroys it.
  No love toward others in that bosom sits
  That on himself such murderous shame commits.

X.

For shame! deny that thou bear'st love to any,
Who for thyself art so unprovident.
Grant, if thou wilt, thou art beloved of many,
But that thou none lovest is most evident;
For thou art so possess'd with murderous hate
That 'gainst thyself thou stick'st not to conspire.
Seeking that beauteous roof to ruinate
Which to repair should be thy chief desire.
O, change thy thought, that I may change my mind!
Shall hate be fairer lodged than gentle love?
Be, as thy presence is, gracious and kind,
Or to thyself at least kind-hearted prove:
  Make thee another self, for love of me,
  That beauty still may live in thine or thee.

XI.

As fast as thou shalt wane, so fast thou growest
In one of thine, from that which thou departest;
And that fresh blood which youngly thou bestowest
Thou mayst call thine when thou from youth convertest.
Herein lives wisdom, beauty and increase:
Without this, folly, age and cold decay:
If all were minded so, the times should cease
And threescore year would make the world away.
Let those whom Nature hath not made for store,
Harsh featureless and rude, barrenly perish:
Look, whom she best endow'd she gave the more;
Which bounteous gift thou shouldst in bounty cherish:
  She carved thee for her seal, and meant thereby
  Thou shouldst print more, not let that copy die.

XII.

When I do count the clock that tells the time,
And see the brave day sunk in hideous night;
When I behold the violet past prime,
And sable curls all silver'd o'er with white;
When lofty trees I see barren of leaves
Which erst from heat did canopy the herd,
And summer's green all girded up in sheaves
Borne on the bier with white and bristly beard,
Then of thy beauty do I question make,
That thou among the wastes of time must go,
Since sweets and beauties do themselves forsake
And die as fast as they see others grow;
  And nothing 'gainst Time's scythe can make defence
  Save breed, to brave him when he takes thee hence.

XIII.

O, that you were yourself! but, love, you are
No longer yours than you yourself here live:
Against this coming end you should prepare,
And your sweet semblance to some other give.
So should that beauty which you hold in lease
Find no determination: then you were
Yourself again after yourself's decease,
When your sweet issue your sweet form should bear.
Who lets so fair a house fall to decay,
Which husbandry in honour might uphold
Against the stormy gusts of winter's day
And barren rage of death's eternal cold?
  O, none but unthrifts! Dear my love, you know
  You had a father: let your son say so.

XIV.

Not from the stars do I my judgment pluck;
And yet methinks I have astronomy,
But not to tell of good or evil luck,
Of plagues, of dearths, or seasons' quality;
Nor can I fortune to brief minutes tell,
Pointing to each his thunder, rain and wind,
Or say with princes if it shall go well,
By oft predict that I in heaven find:
But from thine eyes my knowledge I derive,
And, constant stars, in them I read such art
As truth and beauty shall together thrive,
If from thyself to store thou wouldst convert;
  Or else of thee this I prognosticate:
  Thy end is truth's and beauty's doom and date.

XV.

When I consider every thing that grows
Holds in perfection but a little moment,
That this huge stage presenteth nought but shows
Whereon the stars in secret influence comment;
When I perceive that men as plants increase,
Cheered and cheque'd even by the self-same sky,
Vaunt in their youthful sap, at height decrease,
And wear their brave state out of memory;
Then the conceit of this inconstant stay
Sets you most rich in youth before my sight,
Where wasteful Time debateth with Decay,
To change your day of youth to sullied night;
  And all in war with Time for love of you,
  As he takes from you, I engraft you new.

XVI.

But wherefore do not you a mightier way
Make war upon this bloody tyrant, Time?
And fortify yourself in your decay
With means more blessed than my barren rhyme?
Now stand you on the top of happy hours,
And many maiden gardens yet unset
With virtuous wish would bear your living flowers,
Much liker than your painted counterfeit:
So should the lines of life that life repair,
Which this, Time's pencil, or my pupil pen,
Neither in inward worth nor outward fair,
Can make you live yourself in eyes of men.
  To give away yourself keeps yourself still,
  And you must live, drawn by your own sweet skill.

XVII.

Who will believe my verse in time to come,
If it were fill'd with your most high deserts?
Though yet, heaven knows, it is but as a tomb
Which hides your life and shows not half your parts.
If I could write the beauty of your eyes
And in fresh numbers number all your graces,
The age to come would say 'This poet lies:
Such heavenly touches ne'er touch'd earthly faces.'
So should my papers yellow'd with their age
Be scorn'd like old men of less truth than tongue,
And your true rights be term'd a poet's rage
And stretched metre of an antique song:
  But were some child of yours alive that time,
  You should live twice; in it and in my rhyme.

XVIII.

Shall I compare thee to a summer's day?
Thou art more lovely and more temperate:
Rough winds do shake the darling buds of May,
And summer's lease hath all too short a date:
Sometime too hot the eye of heaven shines,
And often is his gold complexion dimm'd;
And every fair from fair sometime declines,
By chance or nature's changing course untrimm'd;
But thy eternal summer shall not fade
Nor lose possession of that fair thou owest;
Nor shall Death brag thou wander'st in his shade,
When in eternal lines to time thou growest:
  So long as men can breathe or eyes can see,
  So long lives this and this gives life to thee.

XIX.

Devouring Time, blunt thou the lion's paws,
And make the earth devour her own sweet brood;
Pluck the keen teeth from the fierce tiger's jaws,
And burn the long-lived phoenix in her blood;
Make glad and sorry seasons as thou fleets,
And do whate'er thou wilt, swift-footed Time,
To the wide world and all her fading sweets;
But I forbid thee one most heinous crime:
O, carve not with thy hours my love's fair brow,
Nor draw no lines there with thine antique pen;
Him in thy course untainted do allow
For beauty's pattern to succeeding men.
  Yet, do thy worst, old Time: despite thy wrong,
  My love shall in my verse ever live young.

XX.

A woman's face with Nature's own hand painted
Hast thou, the master-mistress of my passion;
A woman's gentle heart, but not acquainted
With shifting change, as is false women's fashion;
An eye more bright than theirs, less false in rolling,
Gilding the object whereupon it gazeth;
A man in hue, all 'hues' in his controlling,
Much steals men's eyes and women's souls amazeth.
And for a woman wert thou first created;
Till Nature, as she wrought thee, fell a-doting,
And by addition me of thee defeated,
By adding one thing to my purpose nothing.
  But since she prick'd thee out for women's pleasure,
  Mine be thy love and thy love's use their treasure.

XXI.

So is it not with me as with that Muse
Stirr'd by a painted beauty to his verse,
Who heaven itself for ornament doth use
And every fair with his fair doth rehearse
Making a couplement of proud compare,
With sun and moon, with earth and sea's rich gems,
With April's first-born flowers, and all things rare
That heaven's air in this huge rondure hems.
O' let me, true in love, but truly write,
And then believe me, my love is as fair
As any mother's child, though not so bright
As those gold candles fix'd in heaven's air:
  Let them say more than like of hearsay well;
  I will not praise that purpose not to sell.

XXII.

My glass shall not persuade me I am old,
So long as youth and thou are of one date;
But when in thee time's furrows I behold,
Then look I death my days should expiate.
For all that beauty that doth cover thee
Is but the seemly raiment of my heart,
Which in thy breast doth live, as thine in me:
How can I then be elder than thou art?
O, therefore, love, be of thyself so wary
As I, not for myself, but for thee will;
Bearing thy heart, which I will keep so chary
As tender nurse her babe from faring ill.
  Presume not on thy heart when mine is slain;
  Thou gavest me thine, not to give back again.

XXIII.

As an unperfect actor on the stage
Who with his fear is put besides his part,
Or some fierce thing replete with too much rage,
Whose strength's abundance weakens his own heart.
So I, for fear of trust, forget to say
The perfect ceremony of love's rite,
And in mine own love's strength seem to decay,
O'ercharged with burden of mine own love's might.
O, let my books be then the eloquence
And dumb presagers of my speaking breast,
Who plead for love and look for recompense
More than that tongue that more hath more express'd.
  O, learn to read what silent love hath writ:
  To hear with eyes belongs to love's fine wit.

XXIV.

Mine eye hath play'd the painter and hath stell'd
Thy beauty's form in table of my heart;
My body is the frame wherein 'tis held,
And perspective it is the painter's art.
For through the painter must you see his skill,
To find where your true image pictured lies;
Which in my bosom's shop is hanging still,
That hath his windows glazed with thine eyes.
Now see what good turns eyes for eyes have done:
Mine eyes have drawn thy shape, and thine for me
Are windows to my breast, where-through the sun
Delights to peep, to gaze therein on thee;
  Yet eyes this cunning want to grace their art;
  They draw but what they see, know not the heart.

XXV.

Let those who are in favour with their stars
Of public honour and proud titles boast,
Whilst I, whom fortune of such triumph bars,
Unlook'd for joy in that I honour most.
Great princes' favourites their fair leaves spread
But as the marigold at the sun's eye,
And in themselves their pride lies buried,
For at a frown they in their glory die.
The painful warrior famoused for fight,
After a thousand victories once foil'd,
Is from the book of honour razed quite,
And all the rest forgot for which he toil'd:
  Then happy I, that love and am beloved
  Where I may not remove nor be removed.

XXVI.

Lord of my love, to whom in vassalage
Thy merit hath my duty strongly knit,
To thee I send this written embassage,
To witness duty, not to show my wit:
Duty so great, which wit so poor as mine
May make seem bare, in wanting words to show it,
But that I hope some good conceit of thine
In thy soul's thought, all naked, will bestow it;
Till whatsoever star that guides my moving
Points on me graciously with fair aspect
And puts apparel on my tatter'd loving,
To show me worthy of thy sweet respect:
  Then may I dare to boast how I do love thee;
  Till then not show my head where thou mayst prove me.

XXVII.

Weary with toil, I haste me to my bed,
The dear repose for limbs with travel tired;
But then begins a journey in my head,
To work my mind, when body's work's expired:
For then my thoughts, from far where I abide,
Intend a zealous pilgrimage to thee,
And keep my drooping eyelids open wide,
Looking on darkness which the blind do see
Save that my soul's imaginary sight
Presents thy shadow to my sightless view,
Which, like a jewel hung in ghastly night,
Makes black night beauteous and her old face new.
  Lo! thus, by day my limbs, by night my mind,
  For thee and for myself no quiet find.

XXVIII.

How can I then return in happy plight,
That am debarr'd the benefit of rest?
When day's oppression is not eased by night,
But day by night, and night by day, oppress'd?
And each, though enemies to either's reign,
Do in consent shake hands to torture me;
The one by toil, the other to complain
How far I toil, still farther off from thee.
I tell the day, to please them thou art bright
And dost him grace when clouds do blot the heaven:
So flatter I the swart-complexion'd night,
When sparkling stars twire not thou gild'st the even.
But day doth daily draw my sorrows longer
  And night doth nightly make grief's strength
  	seem stronger.

XXIX.

When, in disgrace with fortune and men's eyes,
I all alone beweep my outcast state
And trouble deal heaven with my bootless cries
And look upon myself and curse my fate,
Wishing me like to one more rich in hope,
Featured like him, like him with friends possess'd,
Desiring this man's art and that man's scope,
With what I most enjoy contented least;
Yet in these thoughts myself almost despising,
Haply I think on thee, and then my state,
Like to the lark at break of day arising
From sullen earth, sings hymns at heaven's gate;
  For thy sweet love remember'd such wealth brings
  That then I scorn to change my state with kings.

XXX.

When to the sessions of sweet silent thought
I summon up remembrance of things past,
I sigh the lack of many a thing I sought,
And with old woes new wail my dear time's waste:
Then can I drown an eye, unused to flow,
For precious friends hid in death's dateless night,
And weep afresh love's long since cancell'd woe,
And moan the expense of many a vanish'd sight:
Then can I grieve at grievances foregone,
And heavily from woe to woe tell o'er
The sad account of fore-bemoaned moan,
Which I new pay as if not paid before.
  But if the while I think on thee, dear friend,
  All losses are restored and sorrows end.

XXXI.

Thy bosom is endeared with all hearts,
Which I by lacking have supposed dead,
And there reigns love and all love's loving parts,
And all those friends which I thought buried.
How many a holy and obsequious tear
Hath dear religious love stol'n from mine eye
As interest of the dead, which now appear
But things removed that hidden in thee lie!
Thou art the grave where buried love doth live,
Hung with the trophies of my lovers gone,
Who all their parts of me to thee did give;
That due of many now is thine alone:
  Their images I loved I view in thee,
  And thou, all they, hast all the all of me.

XXXII.

If thou survive my well-contented day,
When that churl Death my bones with dust shall cover,
And shalt by fortune once more re-survey
These poor rude lines of thy deceased lover,
Compare them with the bettering of the time,
And though they be outstripp'd by every pen,
Reserve them for my love, not for their rhyme,
Exceeded by the height of happier men.
O, then vouchsafe me but this loving thought:
'Had my friend's Muse grown with this growing age,
A dearer birth than this his love had brought,
To march in ranks of better equipage:
  But since he died and poets better prove,
  Theirs for their style I'll read, his for his love.'

XXXIII.

Full many a glorious morning have I seen
Flatter the mountain-tops with sovereign eye,
Kissing with golden face the meadows green,
Gilding pale streams with heavenly alchemy;
Anon permit the basest clouds to ride
With ugly rack on his celestial face,
And from the forlorn world his visage hide,
Stealing unseen to west with this disgrace:
Even so my sun one early morn did shine
With all triumphant splendor on my brow;
But out, alack! he was but one hour mine;
The region cloud hath mask'd him from me now.
  Yet him for this my love no whit disdaineth;
  Suns of the world may stain when heaven's sun staineth.

XXXIV.

Why didst thou promise such a beauteous day,
And make me travel forth without my cloak,
To let base clouds o'ertake me in my way,
Hiding thy bravery in their rotten smoke?
'Tis not enough that through the cloud thou break,
To dry the rain on my storm-beaten face,
For no man well of such a salve can speak
That heals the wound and cures not the disgrace:
Nor can thy shame give physic to my grief;
Though thou repent, yet I have still the loss:
The offender's sorrow lends but weak relief
To him that bears the strong offence's cross.
  Ah! but those tears are pearl which thy love sheds,
  And they are rich and ransom all ill deeds.

XXXV.

No more be grieved at that which thou hast done:
Roses have thorns, and silver fountains mud;
Clouds and eclipses stain both moon and sun,
And loathsome canker lives in sweetest bud.
All men make faults, and even I in this,
Authorizing thy trespass with compare,
Myself corrupting, salving thy amiss,
Excusing thy sins more than thy sins are;
For to thy sensual fault I bring in sense--
Thy adverse party is thy advocate--
And 'gainst myself a lawful plea commence:
Such civil war is in my love and hate
  That I an accessary needs must be
  To that sweet thief which sourly robs from me.

XXXVI.

Let me confess that we two must be twain,
Although our undivided loves are one:
So shall those blots that do with me remain
Without thy help by me be borne alone.
In our two loves there is but one respect,
Though in our lives a separable spite,
Which though it alter not love's sole effect,
Yet doth it steal sweet hours from love's delight.
I may not evermore acknowledge thee,
Lest my bewailed guilt should do thee shame,
Nor thou with public kindness honour me,
Unless thou take that honour from thy name:
  But do not so; I love thee in such sort
  As, thou being mine, mine is thy good report.

XXXVII.

As a decrepit father takes delight
To see his active child do deeds of youth,
So I, made lame by fortune's dearest spite,
Take all my comfort of thy worth and truth.
For whether beauty, birth, or wealth, or wit,
Or any of these all, or all, or more,
Entitled in thy parts do crowned sit,
I make my love engrafted to this store:
So then I am not lame, poor, nor despised,
Whilst that this shadow doth such substance give
That I in thy abundance am sufficed
And by a part of all thy glory live.
  Look, what is best, that best I wish in thee:
  This wish I have; then ten times happy me!

XXXVIII.

How can my Muse want subject to invent,
While thou dost breathe, that pour'st into my verse
Thine own sweet argument, too excellent
For every vulgar paper to rehearse?
O, give thyself the thanks, if aught in me
Worthy perusal stand against thy sight;
For who's so dumb that cannot write to thee,
When thou thyself dost give invention light?
Be thou the tenth Muse, ten times more in worth
Than those old nine which rhymers invocate;
And he that calls on thee, let him bring forth
Eternal numbers to outlive long date.
  If my slight Muse do please these curious days,
  The pain be mine, but thine shall be the praise.

XXXIX.

O, how thy worth with manners may I sing,
When thou art all the better part of me?
What can mine own praise to mine own self bring?
And what is 't but mine own when I praise thee?
Even for this let us divided live,
And our dear love lose name of single one,
That by this separation I may give
That due to thee which thou deservest alone.
O absence, what a torment wouldst thou prove,
Were it not thy sour leisure gave sweet leave
To entertain the time with thoughts of love,
Which time and thoughts so sweetly doth deceive,
  And that thou teachest how to make one twain,
  By praising him here who doth hence remain!

XL.

Take all my loves, my love, yea, take them all;
What hast thou then more than thou hadst before?
No love, my love, that thou mayst true love call;
All mine was thine before thou hadst this more.
Then if for my love thou my love receivest,
I cannot blame thee for my love thou usest;
But yet be blamed, if thou thyself deceivest
By wilful taste of what thyself refusest.
I do forgive thy robbery, gentle thief,
Although thou steal thee all my poverty;
And yet, love knows, it is a greater grief
To bear love's wrong than hate's known injury.
  Lascivious grace, in whom all ill well shows,
  Kill me with spites; yet we must not be foes.

XLI.

Those petty wrongs that liberty commits,
When I am sometime absent from thy heart,
Thy beauty and thy years full well befits,
For still temptation follows where thou art.
Gentle thou art and therefore to be won,
Beauteous thou art, therefore to be assailed;
And when a woman woos, what woman's son
Will sourly leave her till she have prevailed?
Ay me! but yet thou mightest my seat forbear,
And chide try beauty and thy straying youth,
Who lead thee in their riot even there
Where thou art forced to break a twofold truth,
  Hers by thy beauty tempting her to thee,
  Thine, by thy beauty being false to me.

XLII.

That thou hast her, it is not all my grief,
And yet it may be said I loved her dearly;
That she hath thee, is of my wailing chief,
A loss in love that touches me more nearly.
Loving offenders, thus I will excuse ye:
Thou dost love her, because thou knowst I love her;
And for my sake even so doth she abuse me,
Suffering my friend for my sake to approve her.
If I lose thee, my loss is my love's gain,
And losing her, my friend hath found that loss;
Both find each other, and I lose both twain,
And both for my sake lay on me this cross:
  But here's the joy; my friend and I are one;
  Sweet flattery! then she loves but me alone.

XLIII.

When most I wink, then do mine eyes best see,
For all the day they view things unrespected;
But when I sleep, in dreams they look on thee,
And darkly bright are bright in dark directed.
Then thou, whose shadow shadows doth make bright,
How would thy shadow's form form happy show
To the clear day with thy much clearer light,
When to unseeing eyes thy shade shines so!
How would, I say, mine eyes be blessed made
By looking on thee in the living day,
When in dead night thy fair imperfect shade
Through heavy sleep on sightless eyes doth stay!
  All days are nights to see till I see thee,
  And nights bright days when dreams do show thee me.

XLIV.

If the dull substance of my flesh were thought,
Injurious distance should not stop my way;
For then despite of space I would be brought,
From limits far remote where thou dost stay.
No matter then although my foot did stand
Upon the farthest earth removed from thee;
For nimble thought can jump both sea and land
As soon as think the place where he would be.
But ah! thought kills me that I am not thought,
To leap large lengths of miles when thou art gone,
But that so much of earth and water wrought
I must attend time's leisure with my moan,
  Receiving nought by elements so slow
  But heavy tears, badges of either's woe.

XLV.

The other two, slight air and purging fire,
Are both with thee, wherever I abide;
The first my thought, the other my desire,
These present-absent with swift motion slide.
For when these quicker elements are gone
In tender embassy of love to thee,
My life, being made of four, with two alone
Sinks down to death, oppress'd with melancholy;
Until life's composition be recured
By those swift messengers return'd from thee,
Who even but now come back again, assured
Of thy fair health, recounting it to me:
  This told, I joy; but then no longer glad,
  I send them back again and straight grow sad.

XLVI.

Mine eye and heart are at a mortal war
How to divide the conquest of thy sight;
Mine eye my heart thy picture's sight would bar,
My heart mine eye the freedom of that right.
My heart doth plead that thou in him dost lie--
A closet never pierced with crystal eyes--
But the defendant doth that plea deny
And says in him thy fair appearance lies.
To 'cide this title is impanneled
A quest of thoughts, all tenants to the heart,
And by their verdict is determined
The clear eye's moiety and the dear heart's part:
  As thus; mine eye's due is thy outward part,
  And my heart's right thy inward love of heart.

XLVII.

Betwixt mine eye and heart a league is took,
And each doth good turns now unto the other:
When that mine eye is famish'd for a look,
Or heart in love with sighs himself doth smother,
With my love's picture then my eye doth feast
And to the painted banquet bids my heart;
Another time mine eye is my heart's guest
And in his thoughts of love doth share a part:
So, either by thy picture or my love,
Thyself away art resent still with me;
For thou not farther than my thoughts canst move,
And I am still with them and they with thee;
  Or, if they sleep, thy picture in my sight
  Awakes my heart to heart's and eye's delight.

XLVIII.

How careful was I, when I took my way,
Each trifle under truest bars to thrust,
That to my use it might unused stay
From hands of falsehood, in sure wards of trust!
But thou, to whom my jewels trifles are,
Most worthy of comfort, now my greatest grief,
Thou, best of dearest and mine only care,
Art left the prey of every vulgar thief.
Thee have I not lock'd up in any chest,
Save where thou art not, though I feel thou art,
Within the gentle closure of my breast,
From whence at pleasure thou mayst come and part;
  And even thence thou wilt be stol'n, I fear,
  For truth proves thievish for a prize so dear.

XLIX.

Against that time, if ever that time come,
When I shall see thee frown on my defects,
When as thy love hath cast his utmost sum,
Call'd to that audit by advised respects;
Against that time when thou shalt strangely pass
And scarcely greet me with that sun thine eye,
When love, converted from the thing it was,
Shall reasons find of settled gravity,--
Against that time do I ensconce me here
Within the knowledge of mine own desert,
And this my hand against myself uprear,
To guard the lawful reasons on thy part:
  To leave poor me thou hast the strength of laws,
  Since why to love I can allege no cause.

L.

How heavy do I journey on the way,
When what I seek, my weary travel's end,
Doth teach that ease and that repose to say
'Thus far the miles are measured from thy friend!'
The beast that bears me, tired with my woe,
Plods dully on, to bear that weight in me,
As if by some instinct the wretch did know
His rider loved not speed, being made from thee:
The bloody spur cannot provoke him on
That sometimes anger thrusts into his hide;
Which heavily he answers with a groan,
More sharp to me than spurring to his side;
  For that same groan doth put this in my mind;
  My grief lies onward and my joy behind.

LI.

Thus can my love excuse the slow offence
Of my dull bearer when from thee I speed:
From where thou art why should I haste me thence?
Till I return, of posting is no need.
O, what excuse will my poor beast then find,
When swift extremity can seem but slow?
Then should I spur, though mounted on the wind;
In winged speed no motion shall I know:
Then can no horse with my desire keep pace;
Therefore desire of perfect'st love being made,
Shall neigh--no dull flesh--in his fiery race;
But love, for love, thus shall excuse my jade;
  Since from thee going he went wilful-slow,
  Towards thee I'll run, and give him leave to go.

LII.

So am I as the rich, whose blessed key
Can bring him to his sweet up-locked treasure,
The which he will not every hour survey,
For blunting the fine point of seldom pleasure.
Therefore are feasts so solemn and so rare,
Since, seldom coming, in the long year set,
Like stones of worth they thinly placed are,
Or captain jewels in the carcanet.
So is the time that keeps you as my chest,
Or as the wardrobe which the robe doth hide,
To make some special instant special blest,
By new unfolding his imprison'd pride.
  Blessed are you, whose worthiness gives scope,
  Being had, to triumph, being lack'd, to hope.

LIII.

What is your substance, whereof are you made,
That millions of strange shadows on you tend?
Since every one hath, every one, one shade,
And you, but one, can every shadow lend.
Describe Adonis, and the counterfeit
Is poorly imitated after you;
On Helen's cheek all art of beauty set,
And you in Grecian tires are painted new:
Speak of the spring and foison of the year;
The one doth shadow of your beauty show,
The other as your bounty doth appear;
And you in every blessed shape we know.
  In all external grace you have some part,
  But you like none, none you, for constant heart.

LIV.

O, how much more doth beauty beauteous seem
By that sweet ornament which truth doth give!
The rose looks fair, but fairer we it deem
For that sweet odour which doth in it live.
The canker-blooms have full as deep a dye
As the perfumed tincture of the roses,
Hang on such thorns and play as wantonly
When summer's breath their masked buds discloses:
But, for their virtue only is their show,
They live unwoo'd and unrespected fade,
Die to themselves. Sweet roses do not so;
Of their sweet deaths are sweetest odours made:
  And so of you, beauteous and lovely youth,
  When that shall fade, my verse distills your truth.

LV.

Not marble, nor the gilded monuments
Of princes, shall outlive this powerful rhyme;
But you shall shine more bright in these contents
Than unswept stone besmear'd with sluttish time.
When wasteful war shall statues overturn,
And broils root out the work of masonry,
Nor Mars his sword nor war's quick fire shall burn
The living record of your memory.
'Gainst death and all-oblivious enmity
Shall you pace forth; your praise shall still find room
Even in the eyes of all posterity
That wear this world out to the ending doom.
  So, till the judgment that yourself arise,
  You live in this, and dwell in lover's eyes.

LVI.

Sweet love, renew thy force; be it not said
Thy edge should blunter be than appetite,
Which but to-day by feeding is allay'd,
To-morrow sharpen'd in his former might:
So, love, be thou; although to-day thou fill
Thy hungry eyes even till they wink with fullness,
To-morrow see again, and do not kill
The spirit of love with a perpetual dullness.
Let this sad interim like the ocean be
Which parts the shore, where two contracted new
Come daily to the banks, that, when they see
Return of love, more blest may be the view;
  Else call it winter, which being full of care
  Makes summer's welcome thrice more wish'd, more rare.

LVII.

Being your slave, what should I do but tend
Upon the hours and times of your desire?
I have no precious time at all to spend,
Nor services to do, till you require.
Nor dare I chide the world-without-end hour
Whilst I, my sovereign, watch the clock for you,
Nor think the bitterness of absence sour
When you have bid your servant once adieu;
Nor dare I question with my jealous thought
Where you may be, or your affairs suppose,
But, like a sad slave, stay and think of nought
Save, where you are how happy you make those.
  So true a fool is love that in your will,
  Though you do any thing, he thinks no ill.

LVIII.

That god forbid that made me first your slave,
I should in thought control your times of pleasure,
Or at your hand the account of hours to crave,
Being your vassal, bound to stay your leisure!
O, let me suffer, being at your beck,
The imprison'd absence of your liberty;
And patience, tame to sufferance, bide each cheque,
Without accusing you of injury.
Be where you list, your charter is so strong
That you yourself may privilege your time
To what you will; to you it doth belong
Yourself to pardon of self-doing crime.
  I am to wait, though waiting so be hell;
  Not blame your pleasure, be it ill or well.

LIX.

If there be nothing new, but that which is
Hath been before, how are our brains beguiled,
Which, labouring for invention, bear amiss
The second burden of a former child!
O, that record could with a backward look,
Even of five hundred courses of the sun,
Show me your image in some antique book,
Since mind at first in character was done!
That I might see what the old world could say
To this composed wonder of your frame;
Whether we are mended, or whether better they,
Or whether revolution be the same.
  O, sure I am, the wits of former days
  To subjects worse have given admiring praise.

LX.

Like as the waves make towards the pebbled shore,
So do our minutes hasten to their end;
Each changing place with that which goes before,
In sequent toil all forwards do contend.
Nativity, once in the main of light,
Crawls to maturity, wherewith being crown'd,
Crooked elipses 'gainst his glory fight,
And Time that gave doth now his gift confound.
Time doth transfix the flourish set on youth
And delves the parallels in beauty's brow,
Feeds on the rarities of nature's truth,
And nothing stands but for his scythe to mow:
  And yet to times in hope my verse shall stand,
  Praising thy worth, despite his cruel hand.

LXI.

Is it thy will thy image should keep open
My heavy eyelids to the weary night?
Dost thou desire my slumbers should be broken,
While shadows like to thee do mock my sight?
Is it thy spirit that thou send'st from thee
So far from home into my deeds to pry,
To find out shames and idle hours in me,
The scope and tenor of thy jealousy?
O, no! thy love, though much, is not so great:
It is my love that keeps mine eye awake;
Mine own true love that doth my rest defeat,
To play the watchman ever for thy sake:
  For thee watch I whilst thou dost wake elsewhere,
  From me far off, with others all too near.

LXII.

Sin of self-love possesseth all mine eye
And all my soul and all my every part;
And for this sin there is no remedy,
It is so grounded inward in my heart.
Methinks no face so gracious is as mine,
No shape so true, no truth of such account;
And for myself mine own worth do define,
As I all other in all worths surmount.
But when my glass shows me myself indeed,
Beated and chopp'd with tann'd antiquity,
Mine own self-love quite contrary I read;
Self so self-loving were iniquity.
  'Tis thee, myself, that for myself I praise,
  Painting my age with beauty of thy days.

LXIII.

Against my love shall be, as I am now,
With Time's injurious hand crush'd and o'er-worn;
When hours have drain'd his blood and fill'd his brow
With lines and wrinkles; when his youthful morn
Hath travell'd on to age's steepy night,
And all those beauties whereof now he's king
Are vanishing or vanish'd out of sight,
Stealing away the treasure of his spring;
For such a time do I now fortify
Against confounding age's cruel knife,
That he shall never cut from memory
My sweet love's beauty, though my lover's life:
  His beauty shall in these black lines be seen,
  And they shall live, and he in them still green.

LXIV.

When I have seen by Time's fell hand defaced
The rich proud cost of outworn buried age;
When sometime lofty towers I see down-razed
And brass eternal slave to mortal rage;
When I have seen the hungry ocean gain
Advantage on the kingdom of the shore,
And the firm soil win of the watery main,
Increasing store with loss and loss with store;
When I have seen such interchange of state,
Or state itself confounded to decay;
Ruin hath taught me thus to ruminate,
That Time will come and take my love away.
  This thought is as a death, which cannot choose
  But weep to have that which it fears to lose.

LXV.

Since brass, nor stone, nor earth, nor boundless sea,
But sad mortality o'er-sways their power,
How with this rage shall beauty hold a plea,
Whose action is no stronger than a flower?
O, how shall summer's honey breath hold out
Against the wreckful siege of battering days,
When rocks impregnable are not so stout,
Nor gates of steel so strong, but Time decays?
O fearful meditation! where, alack,
Shall Time's best jewel from Time's chest lie hid?
Or what strong hand can hold his swift foot back?
Or who his spoil of beauty can forbid?
  O, none, unless this miracle have might,
  That in black ink my love may still shine bright.

LXVI.

Tired with all these, for restful death I cry,
As, to behold desert a beggar born,
And needy nothing trimm'd in jollity,
And purest faith unhappily forsworn,
And guilded honour shamefully misplaced,
And maiden virtue rudely strumpeted,
And right perfection wrongfully disgraced,
And strength by limping sway disabled,
And art made tongue-tied by authority,
And folly doctor-like controlling skill,
And simple truth miscall'd simplicity,
And captive good attending captain ill:
  Tired with all these, from these would I be gone,
  Save that, to die, I leave my love alone.

LXVII.

Ah! wherefore with infection should he live,
And with his presence grace impiety,
That sin by him advantage should achieve
And lace itself with his society?
Why should false painting imitate his cheek
And steal dead seeing of his living hue?
Why should poor beauty indirectly seek
Roses of shadow, since his rose is true?
Why should he live, now Nature bankrupt is,
Beggar'd of blood to blush through lively veins?
For she hath no exchequer now but his,
And, proud of many, lives upon his gains.
  O, him she stores, to show what wealth she had
  In days long since, before these last so bad.

LXVIII.

Thus is his cheek the map of days outworn,
When beauty lived and died as flowers do now,
Before the bastard signs of fair were born,
Or durst inhabit on a living brow;
Before the golden tresses of the dead,
The right of sepulchres, were shorn away,
To live a second life on second head;
Ere beauty's dead fleece made another gay:
In him those holy antique hours are seen,
Without all ornament, itself and true,
Making no summer of another's green,
Robbing no old to dress his beauty new;
  And him as for a map doth Nature store,
  To show false Art what beauty was of yore.

LXIX.

Those parts of thee that the world's eye doth view
Want nothing that the thought of hearts can mend;
All tongues, the voice of souls, give thee that due,
Uttering bare truth, even so as foes commend.
Thy outward thus with outward praise is crown'd;
But those same tongues that give thee so thine own
In other accents do this praise confound
By seeing farther than the eye hath shown.
They look into the beauty of thy mind,
And that, in guess, they measure by thy deeds;
Then, churls, their thoughts, although their eyes were kind,
To thy fair flower add the rank smell of weeds:
  But why thy odour matcheth not thy show,
  The solve is this, that thou dost common grow.

LXX.

That thou art blamed shall not be thy defect,
For slander's mark was ever yet the fair;
The ornament of beauty is suspect,
A crow that flies in heaven's sweetest air.
So thou be good, slander doth but approve
Thy worth the greater, being woo'd of time;
For canker vice the sweetest buds doth love,
And thou present'st a pure unstained prime.
Thou hast pass'd by the ambush of young days,
Either not assail'd or victor being charged;
Yet this thy praise cannot be so thy praise,
To tie up envy evermore enlarged:
  If some suspect of ill mask'd not thy show,
  Then thou alone kingdoms of hearts shouldst owe.

LXXI.

No longer mourn for me when I am dead
Then you shall hear the surly sullen bell
Give warning to the world that I am fled
From this vile world, with vilest worms to dwell:
Nay, if you read this line, remember not
The hand that writ it; for I love you so
That I in your sweet thoughts would be forgot
If thinking on me then should make you woe.
O, if, I say, you look upon this verse
When I perhaps compounded am with clay,
Do not so much as my poor name rehearse.
But let your love even with my life decay,
  Lest the wise world should look into your moan
  And mock you with me after I am gone.

LXXII.

O, lest the world should task you to recite
What merit lived in me, that you should love
After my death, dear love, forget me quite,
For you in me can nothing worthy prove;
Unless you would devise some virtuous lie,
To do more for me than mine own desert,
And hang more praise upon deceased I
Than niggard truth would willingly impart:
O, lest your true love may seem false in this,
That you for love speak well of me untrue,
My name be buried where my body is,
And live no more to shame nor me nor you.
  For I am shamed by that which I bring forth,
  And so should you, to love things nothing worth.

LXXIII.

That time of year thou mayst in me behold
When yellow leaves, or none, or few, do hang
Upon those boughs which shake against the cold,
Bare ruin'd choirs, where late the sweet birds sang.
In me thou seest the twilight of such day
As after sunset fadeth in the west,
Which by and by black night doth take away,
Death's second self, that seals up all in rest.
In me thou see'st the glowing of such fire
That on the ashes of his youth doth lie,
As the death-bed whereon it must expire
Consumed with that which it was nourish'd by.
  This thou perceivest, which makes thy love more strong,
  To love that well which thou must leave ere long.

LXXIV.

But be contented: when that fell arrest
Without all bail shall carry me away,
My life hath in this line some interest,
Which for memorial still with thee shall stay.
When thou reviewest this, thou dost review
The very part was consecrate to thee:
The earth can have but earth, which is his due;
My spirit is thine, the better part of me:
So then thou hast but lost the dregs of life,
The prey of worms, my body being dead,
The coward conquest of a wretch's knife,
Too base of thee to be remembered.
  The worth of that is that which it contains,
  And that is this, and this with thee remains.

LXXV.

So are you to my thoughts as food to life,
Or as sweet-season'd showers are to the ground;
And for the peace of you I hold such strife
As 'twixt a miser and his wealth is found;
Now proud as an enjoyer and anon
Doubting the filching age will steal his treasure,
Now counting best to be with you alone,
Then better'd that the world may see my pleasure;
Sometime all full with feasting on your sight
And by and by clean starved for a look;
Possessing or pursuing no delight,
Save what is had or must from you be took.
  Thus do I pine and surfeit day by day,
  Or gluttoning on all, or all away.

LXXVI.

Why is my verse so barren of new pride,
So far from variation or quick change?
Why with the time do I not glance aside
To new-found methods and to compounds strange?
Why write I still all one, ever the same,
And keep invention in a noted weed,
That every word doth almost tell my name,
Showing their birth and where they did proceed?
O, know, sweet love, I always write of you,
And you and love are still my argument;
So all my best is dressing old words new,
Spending again what is already spent:
  For as the sun is daily new and old,
  So is my love still telling what is told.

LXXVII.

Thy glass will show thee how thy beauties wear,
Thy dial how thy precious minutes waste;
The vacant leaves thy mind's imprint will bear,
And of this book this learning mayst thou taste.
The wrinkles which thy glass will truly show
Of mouthed graves will give thee memory;
Thou by thy dial's shady stealth mayst know
Time's thievish progress to eternity.
Look, what thy memory can not contain
Commit to these waste blanks, and thou shalt find
Those children nursed, deliver'd from thy brain,
To take a new acquaintance of thy mind.
  These offices, so oft as thou wilt look,
  Shall profit thee and much enrich thy book.

LXXVIII.

So oft have I invoked thee for my Muse
And found such fair assistance in my verse
As every alien pen hath got my use
And under thee their poesy disperse.
Thine eyes that taught the dumb on high to sing
And heavy ignorance aloft to fly
Have added feathers to the learned's wing
And given grace a double majesty.
Yet be most proud of that which I compile,
Whose influence is thine and born of thee:
In others' works thou dost but mend the style,
And arts with thy sweet graces graced be;
  But thou art all my art and dost advance
  As high as learning my rude ignorance.

LXXIX.

Whilst I alone did call upon thy aid,
My verse alone had all thy gentle grace,
But now my gracious numbers are decay'd
And my sick Muse doth give another place.
I grant, sweet love, thy lovely argument
Deserves the travail of a worthier pen,
Yet what of thee thy poet doth invent
He robs thee of and pays it thee again.
He lends thee virtue and he stole that word
From thy behavior; beauty doth he give
And found it in thy cheek; he can afford
No praise to thee but what in thee doth live.
  Then thank him not for that which he doth say,
  Since what he owes thee thou thyself dost pay.

LXXX.

O, how I faint when I of you do write,
Knowing a better spirit doth use your name,
And in the praise thereof spends all his might,
To make me tongue-tied, speaking of your fame!
But since your worth, wide as the ocean is,
The humble as the proudest sail doth bear,
My saucy bark inferior far to his
On your broad main doth wilfully appear.
Your shallowest help will hold me up afloat,
Whilst he upon your soundless deep doth ride;
Or being wreck'd, I am a worthless boat,
He of tall building and of goodly pride:
  Then if he thrive and I be cast away,
  The worst was this; my love was my decay.

LXXXI.

Or I shall live your epitaph to make,
Or you survive when I in earth am rotten;
From hence your memory death cannot take,
Although in me each part will be forgotten.
Your name from hence immortal life shall have,
Though I, once gone, to all the world must die:
The earth can yield me but a common grave,
When you entombed in men's eyes shall lie.
Your monument shall be my gentle verse,
Which eyes not yet created shall o'er-read,
And tongues to be your being shall rehearse
When all the breathers of this world are dead;
  You still shall live--such virtue hath my pen--
  Where breath most breathes, even in the mouths of men.

LXXXII.

I grant thou wert not married to my Muse
And therefore mayst without attaint o'erlook
The dedicated words which writers use
Of their fair subject, blessing every book
Thou art as fair in knowledge as in hue,
Finding thy worth a limit past my praise,
And therefore art enforced to seek anew
Some fresher stamp of the time-bettering days
And do so, love; yet when they have devised
What strained touches rhetoric can lend,
Thou truly fair wert truly sympathized
In true plain words by thy true-telling friend;
  And their gross painting might be better used
  Where cheeks need blood; in thee it is abused.

LXXXIII.

I never saw that you did painting need
And therefore to your fair no painting set;
I found, or thought I found, you did exceed
The barren tender of a poet's debt;
And therefore have I slept in your report,
That you yourself being extant well might show
How far a modern quill doth come too short,
Speaking of worth, what worth in you doth grow.
This silence for my sin you did impute,
Which shall be most my glory, being dumb;
For I impair not beauty being mute,
When others would give life and bring a tomb.
  There lives more life in one of your fair eyes
  Than both your poets can in praise devise.

LXXXIV.

Who is it that says most? which can say more
Than this rich praise, that you alone are you?
In whose confine immured is the store
Which should example where your equal grew.
Lean penury within that pen doth dwell
That to his subject lends not some small glory;
But he that writes of you, if he can tell
That you are you, so dignifies his story,
Let him but copy what in you is writ,
Not making worse what nature made so clear,
And such a counterpart shall fame his wit,
Making his style admired every where.
  You to your beauteous blessings add a curse,
  Being fond on praise, which makes your praises worse.

LXXXV.

My tongue-tied Muse in manners holds her still,
While comments of your praise, richly compiled,
Reserve their character with golden quill
And precious phrase by all the Muses filed.
I think good thoughts whilst other write good words,
And like unletter'd clerk still cry 'Amen'
To every hymn that able spirit affords
In polish'd form of well-refined pen.
Hearing you praised, I say ''Tis so, 'tis true,'
And to the most of praise add something more;
But that is in my thought, whose love to you,
Though words come hindmost, holds his rank before.
  Then others for the breath of words respect,
  Me for my dumb thoughts, speaking in effect.

LXXXVI.

Was it the proud full sail of his great verse,
Bound for the prize of all too precious you,
That did my ripe thoughts in my brain inhearse,
Making their tomb the womb wherein they grew?
Was it his spirit, by spirits taught to write
Above a mortal pitch, that struck me dead?
No, neither he, nor his compeers by night
Giving him aid, my verse astonished.
He, nor that affable familiar ghost
Which nightly gulls him with intelligence
As victors of my silence cannot boast;
I was not sick of any fear from thence:
  But when your countenance fill'd up his line,
  Then lack'd I matter; that enfeebled mine.

LXXXVII.

Farewell! thou art too dear for my possessing,
And like enough thou know'st thy estimate:
The charter of thy worth gives thee releasing;
My bonds in thee are all determinate.
For how do I hold thee but by thy granting?
And for that riches where is my deserving?
The cause of this fair gift in me is wanting,
And so my patent back again is swerving.
Thyself thou gavest, thy own worth then not knowing,
Or me, to whom thou gavest it, else mistaking;
So thy great gift, upon misprision growing,
Comes home again, on better judgment making.
  Thus have I had thee, as a dream doth flatter,
  In sleep a king, but waking no such matter.

LXXXVIII.

When thou shalt be disposed to set me light,
And place my merit in the eye of scorn,
Upon thy side against myself I'll fight,
And prove thee virtuous, though thou art forsworn.
With mine own weakness being best acquainted,
Upon thy part I can set down a story
Of faults conceal'd, wherein I am attainted,
That thou in losing me shalt win much glory:
And I by this will be a gainer too;
For bending all my loving thoughts on thee,
The injuries that to myself I do,
Doing thee vantage, double-vantage me.
  Such is my love, to thee I so belong,
  That for thy right myself will bear all wrong.

LXXXIX.

Say that thou didst forsake me for some fault,
And I will comment upon that offence;
Speak of my lameness, and I straight will halt,
Against thy reasons making no defence.
Thou canst not, love, disgrace me half so ill,
To set a form upon desired change,
As I'll myself disgrace: knowing thy will,
I will acquaintance strangle and look strange,
Be absent from thy walks, and in my tongue
Thy sweet beloved name no more shall dwell,
Lest I, too much profane, should do it wrong
And haply of our old acquaintance tell.
  For thee against myself I'll vow debate,
  For I must ne'er love him whom thou dost hate.

XC.

Then hate me when thou wilt; if ever, now;
Now, while the world is bent my deeds to cross,
Join with the spite of fortune, make me bow,
And do not drop in for an after-loss:
Ah, do not, when my heart hath 'scoped this sorrow,
Come in the rearward of a conquer'd woe;
Give not a windy night a rainy morrow,
To linger out a purposed overthrow.
If thou wilt leave me, do not leave me last,
When other petty griefs have done their spite
But in the onset come; so shall I taste
At first the very worst of fortune's might,
  And other strains of woe, which now seem woe,
  Compared with loss of thee will not seem so.

XCI.

Some glory in their birth, some in their skill,
Some in their wealth, some in their bodies' force,
Some in their garments, though new-fangled ill,
Some in their hawks and hounds, some in their horse;
And every humour hath his adjunct pleasure,
Wherein it finds a joy above the rest:
But these particulars are not my measure;
All these I better in one general best.
Thy love is better than high birth to me,
Richer than wealth, prouder than garments' cost,
Of more delight than hawks or horses be;
And having thee, of all men's pride I boast:
  Wretched in this alone, that thou mayst take
  All this away and me most wretched make.

XCII.

But do thy worst to steal thyself away,
For term of life thou art assured mine,
And life no longer than thy love will stay,
For it depends upon that love of thine.
Then need I not to fear the worst of wrongs,
When in the least of them my life hath end.
I see a better state to me belongs
Than that which on thy humour doth depend;
Thou canst not vex me with inconstant mind,
Since that my life on thy revolt doth lie.
O, what a happy title do I find,
Happy to have thy love, happy to die!
  But what's so blessed-fair that fears no blot?
  Thou mayst be false, and yet I know it not.

XCIII.

So shall I live, supposing thou art true,
Like a deceived husband; so love's face
May still seem love to me, though alter'd new;
Thy looks with me, thy heart in other place:
For there can live no hatred in thine eye,
Therefore in that I cannot know thy change.
In many's looks the false heart's history
Is writ in moods and frowns and wrinkles strange,
But heaven in thy creation did decree
That in thy face sweet love should ever dwell;
Whate'er thy thoughts or thy heart's workings be,
Thy looks should nothing thence but sweetness tell.
  How like Eve's apple doth thy beauty grow,
  if thy sweet virtue answer not thy show!

XCIV.

They that have power to hurt and will do none,
That do not do the thing they most do show,
Who, moving others, are themselves as stone,
Unmoved, cold, and to temptation slow,
They rightly do inherit heaven's graces
And husband nature's riches from expense;
They are the lords and owners of their faces,
Others but stewards of their excellence.
The summer's flower is to the summer sweet,
Though to itself it only live and die,
But if that flower with base infection meet,
The basest weed outbraves his dignity:
  For sweetest things turn sourest by their deeds;
  Lilies that fester smell far worse than weeds.

XCV.

How sweet and lovely dost thou make the shame
Which, like a canker in the fragrant rose,
Doth spot the beauty of thy budding name!
O, in what sweets dost thou thy sins enclose!
That tongue that tells the story of thy days,
Making lascivious comments on thy sport,
Cannot dispraise but in a kind of praise;
Naming thy name blesses an ill report.
O, what a mansion have those vices got
Which for their habitation chose out thee,
Where beauty's veil doth cover every blot,
And all things turn to fair that eyes can see!
  Take heed, dear heart, of this large privilege;
  The hardest knife ill-used doth lose his edge.

XCVI.

Some say thy fault is youth, some wantonness;
Some say thy grace is youth and gentle sport;
Both grace and faults are loved of more and less;
Thou makest faults graces that to thee resort.
As on the finger of a throned queen
The basest jewel will be well esteem'd,
So are those errors that in thee are seen
To truths translated and for true things deem'd.
How many lambs might the stem wolf betray,
If like a lamb he could his looks translate!
How many gazers mightst thou lead away,
If thou wouldst use the strength of all thy state!
  But do not so; I love thee in such sort
  As, thou being mine, mine is thy good report.

XCVII.

How like a winter hath my absence been
From thee, the pleasure of the fleeting year!
What freezings have I felt, what dark days seen!
What old December's bareness every where!
And yet this time removed was summer's time,
The teeming autumn, big with rich increase,
Bearing the wanton burden of the prime,
Like widow'd wombs after their lords' decease:
Yet this abundant issue seem'd to me
But hope of orphans and unfather'd fruit;
For summer and his pleasures wait on thee,
And, thou away, the very birds are mute;
  Or, if they sing, 'tis with so dull a cheer
  That leaves look pale, dreading the winter's near.

XCVIII.

From you have I been absent in the spring,
When proud-pied April dress'd in all his trim
Hath put a spirit of youth in every thing,
That heavy Saturn laugh'd and leap'd with him.
Yet nor the lays of birds nor the sweet smell
Of different flowers in odour and in hue
Could make me any summer's story tell,
Or from their proud lap pluck them where they grew;
Nor did I wonder at the lily's white,
Nor praise the deep vermilion in the rose;
They were but sweet, but figures of delight,
Drawn after you, you pattern of all those.
  Yet seem'd it winter still, and, you away,
  As with your shadow I with these did play:

XCIX.

The forward violet thus did I chide:
Sweet thief, whence didst thou steal thy sweet that smells,
If not from my love's breath? The purple pride
Which on thy soft cheek for complexion dwells
In my love's veins thou hast too grossly dyed.
The lily I condemned for thy hand,
And buds of marjoram had stol'n thy hair:
The roses fearfully on thorns did stand,
One blushing shame, another white despair;
A third, nor red nor white, had stol'n of both
And to his robbery had annex'd thy breath;
But, for his theft, in pride of all his growth
A vengeful canker eat him up to death.
  More flowers I noted, yet I none could see
  But sweet or colour it had stol'n from thee.

C.

Where art thou, Muse, that thou forget'st so long
To speak of that which gives thee all thy might?
Spend'st thou thy fury on some worthless song,
Darkening thy power to lend base subjects light?
Return, forgetful Muse, and straight redeem
In gentle numbers time so idly spent;
Sing to the ear that doth thy lays esteem
And gives thy pen both skill and argument.
Rise, resty Muse, my love's sweet face survey,
If Time have any wrinkle graven there;
If any, be a satire to decay,
And make Time's spoils despised every where.
  Give my love fame faster than Time wastes life;
  So thou prevent'st his scythe and crooked knife.

CI.

O truant Muse, what shall be thy amends
For thy neglect of truth in beauty dyed?
Both truth and beauty on my love depends;
So dost thou too, and therein dignified.
Make answer, Muse: wilt thou not haply say
'Truth needs no colour, with his colour fix'd;
Beauty no pencil, beauty's truth to lay;
But best is best, if never intermix'd?'
Because he needs no praise, wilt thou be dumb?
Excuse not silence so; for't lies in thee
To make him much outlive a gilded tomb,
And to be praised of ages yet to be.
  Then do thy office, Muse; I teach thee how
  To make him seem long hence as he shows now.

CII.

My love is strengthen'd, though more weak in seeming;
I love not less, though less the show appear:
That love is merchandized whose rich esteeming
The owner's tongue doth publish every where.
Our love was new and then but in the spring
When I was wont to greet it with my lays,
As Philomel in summer's front doth sing
And stops her pipe in growth of riper days:
Not that the summer is less pleasant now
Than when her mournful hymns did hush the night,
But that wild music burthens every bough
And sweets grown common lose their dear delight.
  Therefore like her I sometime hold my tongue,
  Because I would not dull you with my song.

CIII.

Alack, what poverty my Muse brings forth,
That having such a scope to show her pride,
The argument all bare is of more worth
Than when it hath my added praise beside!
O, blame me not, if I no more can write!
Look in your glass, and there appears a face
That over-goes my blunt invention quite,
Dulling my lines and doing me disgrace.
Were it not sinful then, striving to mend,
To mar the subject that before was well?
For to no other pass my verses tend
Than of your graces and your gifts to tell;
  And more, much more, than in my verse can sit
  Your own glass shows you when you look in it.

CIV.

To me, fair friend, you never can be old,
For as you were when first your eye I eyed,
Such seems your beauty still. Three winters cold
Have from the forests shook three summers' pride,
Three beauteous springs to yellow autumn turn'd
In process of the seasons have I seen,
Three April perfumes in three hot Junes burn'd,
Since first I saw you fresh, which yet are green.
Ah! yet doth beauty, like a dial-hand,
Steal from his figure and no pace perceived;
So your sweet hue, which methinks still doth stand,
Hath motion and mine eye may be deceived:
  For fear of which, hear this, thou age unbred;
  Ere you were born was beauty's summer dead.

CV.

Let not my love be call'd idolatry,
Nor my beloved as an idol show,
Since all alike my songs and praises be
To one, of one, still such, and ever so.
Kind is my love to-day, to-morrow kind,
Still constant in a wondrous excellence;
Therefore my verse to constancy confined,
One thing expressing, leaves out difference.
'Fair, kind and true' is all my argument,
'Fair, kind, and true' varying to other words;
And in this change is my invention spent,
Three themes in one, which wondrous scope affords.
  'Fair, kind, and true,' have often lived alone,
  Which three till now never kept seat in one.

CVI.

When in the chronicle of wasted time
I see descriptions of the fairest wights,
And beauty making beautiful old rhyme
In praise of ladies dead and lovely knights,
Then, in the blazon of sweet beauty's best,
Of hand, of foot, of lip, of eye, of brow,
I see their antique pen would have express'd
Even such a beauty as you master now.
So all their praises are but prophecies
Of this our time, all you prefiguring;
And, for they look'd but with divining eyes,
They had not skill enough your worth to sing:
  For we, which now behold these present days,
  Had eyes to wonder, but lack tongues to praise.

CVII.

Not mine own fears, nor the prophetic soul
Of the wide world dreaming on things to come,
Can yet the lease of my true love control,
Supposed as forfeit to a confined doom.
The mortal moon hath her eclipse endured
And the sad augurs mock their own presage;
Incertainties now crown themselves assured
And peace proclaims olives of endless age.
Now with the drops of this most balmy time
My love looks fresh, and death to me subscribes,
Since, spite of him, I'll live in this poor rhyme,
While he insults o'er dull and speechless tribes:
  And thou in this shalt find thy monument,
  When tyrants' crests and tombs of brass are spent.

CVIII.

What's in the brain that ink may character
Which hath not figured to thee my true spirit?
What's new to speak, what new to register,
That may express my love or thy dear merit?
Nothing, sweet boy; but yet, like prayers divine,
I must, each day say o'er the very same,
Counting no old thing old, thou mine, I thine,
Even as when first I hallow'd thy fair name.
So that eternal love in love's fresh case
Weighs not the dust and injury of age,
Nor gives to necessary wrinkles place,
But makes antiquity for aye his page,
  Finding the first conceit of love there bred
  Where time and outward form would show it dead.

CIX.

O, never say that I was false of heart,
Though absence seem'd my flame to qualify.
As easy might I from myself depart
As from my soul, which in thy breast doth lie:
That is my home of love: if I have ranged,
Like him that travels I return again,
Just to the time, not with the time exchanged,
So that myself bring water for my stain.
Never believe, though in my nature reign'd
All frailties that besiege all kinds of blood,
That it could so preposterously be stain'd,
To leave for nothing all thy sum of good;
  For nothing this wide universe I call,
  Save thou, my rose; in it thou art my all.

CX.

Alas, 'tis true I have gone here and there
And made myself a motley to the view,
Gored mine own thoughts, sold cheap what is most dear,
Made old offences of affections new;
Most true it is that I have look'd on truth
Askance and strangely: but, by all above,
These blenches gave my heart another youth,
And worse essays proved thee my best of love.
Now all is done, have what shall have no end:
Mine appetite I never more will grind
On newer proof, to try an older friend,
A god in love, to whom I am confined.
  Then give me welcome, next my heaven the best,
  Even to thy pure and most most loving breast.

CXI.

O, for my sake do you with Fortune chide,
The guilty goddess of my harmful deeds,
That did not better for my life provide
Than public means which public manners breeds.
Thence comes it that my name receives a brand,
And almost thence my nature is subdued
To what it works in, like the dyer's hand:
Pity me then and wish I were renew'd;
Whilst, like a willing patient, I will drink
Potions of eisel 'gainst my strong infection
No bitterness that I will bitter think,
Nor double penance, to correct correction.
  Pity me then, dear friend, and I assure ye
  Even that your pity is enough to cure me.

CXII.

Your love and pity doth the impression fill
Which vulgar scandal stamp'd upon my brow;
For what care I who calls me well or ill,
So you o'er-green my bad, my good allow?
You are my all the world, and I must strive
To know my shames and praises from your tongue:
None else to me, nor I to none alive,
That my steel'd sense or changes right or wrong.
In so profound abysm I throw all care
Of others' voices, that my adder's sense
To critic and to flatterer stopped are.
Mark how with my neglect I do dispense:
  You are so strongly in my purpose bred
  That all the world besides methinks are dead.

CXIII.

Since I left you, mine eye is in my mind;
And that which governs me to go about
Doth part his function and is partly blind,
Seems seeing, but effectually is out;
For it no form delivers to the heart
Of bird of flower, or shape, which it doth latch:
Of his quick objects hath the mind no part,
Nor his own vision holds what it doth catch:
For if it see the rudest or gentlest sight,
The most sweet favour or deformed'st creature,
The mountain or the sea, the day or night,
The crow or dove, it shapes them to your feature:
  Incapable of more, replete with you,
  My most true mind thus makes mine eye untrue.

CXIV.

Or whether doth my mind, being crown'd with you,
Drink up the monarch's plague, this flattery?
Or whether shall I say, mine eye saith true,
And that your love taught it this alchemy,
To make of monsters and things indigest
Such cherubins as your sweet self resemble,
Creating every bad a perfect best,
As fast as objects to his beams assemble?
O,'tis the first; 'tis flattery in my seeing,
And my great mind most kingly drinks it up:
Mine eye well knows what with his gust is 'greeing,
And to his palate doth prepare the cup:
  If it be poison'd, 'tis the lesser sin
  That mine eye loves it and doth first begin.

CXV.

Those lines that I before have writ do lie,
Even those that said I could not love you dearer:
Yet then my judgment knew no reason why
My most full flame should afterwards burn clearer.
But reckoning time, whose million'd accidents
Creep in 'twixt vows and change decrees of kings,
Tan sacred beauty, blunt the sharp'st intents,
Divert strong minds to the course of altering things;
Alas, why, fearing of time's tyranny,
Might I not then say 'Now I love you best,'
When I was certain o'er incertainty,
Crowning the present, doubting of the rest?
  Love is a babe; then might I not say so,
  To give full growth to that which still doth grow?

CXVI.

Let me not to the marriage of true minds
Admit impediments. Love is not love
Which alters when it alteration finds,
Or bends with the remover to remove:
O no! it is an ever-fixed mark
That looks on tempests and is never shaken;
It is the star to every wandering bark,
Whose worth's unknown, although his height be taken.
Love's not Time's fool, though rosy lips and cheeks
Within his bending sickle's compass come:
Love alters not with his brief hours and weeks,
But bears it out even to the edge of doom.
  If this be error and upon me proved,
  I never writ, nor no man ever loved.

CXVII.

Accuse me thus: that I have scanted all
Wherein I should your great deserts repay,
Forgot upon your dearest love to call,
Whereto all bonds do tie me day by day;
That I have frequent been with unknown minds
And given to time your own dear-purchased right
That I have hoisted sail to all the winds
Which should transport me farthest from your sight.
Book both my wilfulness and errors down
And on just proof surmise accumulate;
Bring me within the level of your frown,
But shoot not at me in your waken'd hate;
  Since my appeal says I did strive to prove
  The constancy and virtue of your love.

CXVIII.

Like as, to make our appetites more keen,
With eager compounds we our palate urge,
As, to prevent our maladies unseen,
We sicken to shun sickness when we purge,
Even so, being tuff of your ne'er-cloying sweetness,
To bitter sauces did I frame my feeding
And, sick of welfare, found a kind of meetness
To be diseased ere that there was true needing.
Thus policy in love, to anticipate
The ills that were not, grew to faults assured
And brought to medicine a healthful state
Which, rank of goodness, would by ill be cured:
  But thence I learn, and find the lesson true,
  Drugs poison him that so fell sick of you.

CXIX.

What potions have I drunk of Siren tears,
Distill'd from limbecks foul as hell within,
Applying fears to hopes and hopes to fears,
Still losing when I saw myself to win!
What wretched errors hath my heart committed,
Whilst it hath thought itself so blessed never!
How have mine eyes out of their spheres been fitted
In the distraction of this madding fever!
O benefit of ill! now I find true
That better is by evil still made better;
And ruin'd love, when it is built anew,
Grows fairer than at first, more strong, far greater.
  So I return rebuked to my content
  And gain by ill thrice more than I have spent.

CXX.

That you were once unkind befriends me now,
And for that sorrow which I then did feel
Needs must I under my transgression bow,
Unless my nerves were brass or hammer'd steel.
For if you were by my unkindness shaken
As I by yours, you've pass'd a hell of time,
And I, a tyrant, have no leisure taken
To weigh how once I suffered in your crime.
O, that our night of woe might have remember'd
My deepest sense, how hard true sorrow hits,
And soon to you, as you to me, then tender'd
The humble slave which wounded bosoms fits!
  But that your trespass now becomes a fee;
  Mine ransoms yours, and yours must ransom me.

CXXI.

'Tis better to be vile than vile esteem'd,
When not to be receives reproach of being,
And the just pleasure lost which is so deem'd
Not by our feeling but by others' seeing:
For why should others false adulterate eyes
Give salutation to my sportive blood?
Or on my frailties why are frailer spies,
Which in their wills count bad what I think good?
No, I am that I am, and they that level
At my abuses reckon up their own:
I may be straight, though they themselves be bevel;
By their rank thoughts my deeds must not be shown;
  Unless this general evil they maintain,
  All men are bad, and in their badness reign.

CXXII.

Thy gift, thy tables, are within my brain
Full character'd with lasting memory,
Which shall above that idle rank remain
Beyond all date, even to eternity;
Or at the least, so long as brain and heart
Have faculty by nature to subsist;
Till each to razed oblivion yield his part
Of thee, thy record never can be miss'd.
That poor retention could not so much hold,
Nor need I tallies thy dear love to score;
Therefore to give them from me was I bold,
To trust those tables that receive thee more:
  To keep an adjunct to remember thee
  Were to import forgetfulness in me.

CXXIII.

No, Time, thou shalt not boast that I do change:
Thy pyramids built up with newer might
To me are nothing novel, nothing strange;
They are but dressings of a former sight.
Our dates are brief, and therefore we admire
What thou dost foist upon us that is old,
And rather make them born to our desire
Than think that we before have heard them told.
Thy registers and thee I both defy,
Not wondering at the present nor the past,
For thy records and what we see doth lie,
Made more or less by thy continual haste.
  This I do vow and this shall ever be;
  I will be true, despite thy scythe and thee.

CXXIV.

If my dear love were but the child of state,
It might for Fortune's bastard be unfather'd'
As subject to Time's love or to Time's hate,
Weeds among weeds, or flowers with flowers gather'd.
No, it was builded far from accident;
It suffers not in smiling pomp, nor falls
Under the blow of thralled discontent,
Whereto the inviting time our fashion calls:
It fears not policy, that heretic,
Which works on leases of short-number'd hours,
But all alone stands hugely politic,
That it nor grows with heat nor drowns with showers.
  To this I witness call the fools of time,
  Which die for goodness, who have lived for crime.

CXXV.

Were 't aught to me I bore the canopy,
With my extern the outward honouring,
Or laid great bases for eternity,
Which prove more short than waste or ruining?
Have I not seen dwellers on form and favour
Lose all, and more, by paying too much rent,
For compound sweet forgoing simple savour,
Pitiful thrivers, in their gazing spent?
No, let me be obsequious in thy heart,
And take thou my oblation, poor but free,
Which is not mix'd with seconds, knows no art,
But mutual render, only me for thee.
  Hence, thou suborn'd informer! a true soul
  When most impeach'd stands least in thy control.

CXXVI.

O thou, my lovely boy, who in thy power
Dost hold Time's fickle glass, his sickle, hour;
Who hast by waning grown, and therein show'st
Thy lovers withering as thy sweet self grow'st;
If Nature, sovereign mistress over wrack,
As thou goest onwards, still will pluck thee back,
She keeps thee to this purpose, that her skill
May time disgrace and wretched minutes kill.
Yet fear her, O thou minion of her pleasure!
She may detain, but not still keep, her treasure:
  Her audit, though delay'd, answer'd must be,
  And her quietus is to render thee.

CXXVII.

In the old age black was not counted fair,
Or if it were, it bore not beauty's name;
But now is black beauty's successive heir,
And beauty slander'd with a bastard shame:
For since each hand hath put on nature's power,
Fairing the foul with art's false borrow'd face,
Sweet beauty hath no name, no holy bower,
But is profaned, if not lives in disgrace.
Therefore my mistress' brows are raven black,
Her eyes so suited, and they mourners seem
At such who, not born fair, no beauty lack,
Slandering creation with a false esteem:
  Yet so they mourn, becoming of their woe,
  That every tongue says beauty should look so.

CXXVIII.

How oft, when thou, my music, music play'st,
Upon that blessed wood whose motion sounds
With thy sweet fingers, when thou gently sway'st
The wiry concord that mine ear confounds,
Do I envy those jacks that nimble leap
To kiss the tender inward of thy hand,
Whilst my poor lips, which should that harvest reap,
At the wood's boldness by thee blushing stand!
To be so tickled, they would change their state
And situation with those dancing chips,
O'er whom thy fingers walk with gentle gait,
Making dead wood more blest than living lips.
  Since saucy jacks so happy are in this,
  Give them thy fingers, me thy lips to kiss.

CXXIX.

The expense of spirit in a waste of shame
Is lust in action; and till action, lust
Is perjured, murderous, bloody, full of blame,
Savage, extreme, rude, cruel, not to trust,
Enjoy'd no sooner but despised straight,
Past reason hunted, and no sooner had
Past reason hated, as a swallow'd bait
On purpose laid to make the taker mad;
Mad in pursuit and in possession so;
Had, having, and in quest to have, extreme;
A bliss in proof, and proved, a very woe;
Before, a joy proposed; behind, a dream.
  All this the world well knows; yet none knows well
  To shun the heaven that leads men to this hell.

CXXX.

My mistress' eyes are nothing like the sun;
Coral is far more red than her lips' red;
If snow be white, why then her breasts are dun;
If hairs be wires, black wires grow on her head.
I have seen roses damask'd, red and white,
But no such roses see I in her cheeks;
And in some perfumes is there more delight
Than in the breath that from my mistress reeks.
I love to hear her speak, yet well I know
That music hath a far more pleasing sound;
I grant I never saw a goddess go;
My mistress, when she walks, treads on the ground:
  And yet, by heaven, I think my love as rare
  As any she belied with false compare.

CXXXI.

Thou art as tyrannous, so as thou art,
As those whose beauties proudly make them cruel;
For well thou know'st to my dear doting heart
Thou art the fairest and most precious jewel.
Yet, in good faith, some say that thee behold
Thy face hath not the power to make love groan:
To say they err I dare not be so bold,
Although I swear it to myself alone.
And, to be sure that is not false I swear,
A thousand groans, but thinking on thy face,
One on another's neck, do witness bear
Thy black is fairest in my judgment's place.
  In nothing art thou black save in thy deeds,
  And thence this slander, as I think, proceeds.

CXXXII.

Thine eyes I love, and they, as pitying me,
Knowing thy heart torments me with disdain,
Have put on black and loving mourners be,
Looking with pretty ruth upon my pain.
And truly not the morning sun of heaven
Better becomes the grey cheeks of the east,
Nor that full star that ushers in the even
Doth half that glory to the sober west,
As those two mourning eyes become thy face:
O, let it then as well beseem thy heart
To mourn for me, since mourning doth thee grace,
And suit thy pity like in every part.
  Then will I swear beauty herself is black
  And all they foul that thy complexion lack.

CXXXIII.

Beshrew that heart that makes my heart to groan
For that deep wound it gives my friend and me!
Is't not enough to torture me alone,
But slave to slavery my sweet'st friend must be?
Me from myself thy cruel eye hath taken,
And my next self thou harder hast engross'd:
Of him, myself, and thee, I am forsaken;
A torment thrice threefold thus to be cross'd.
Prison my heart in thy steel bosom's ward,
But then my friend's heart let my poor heart bail;
Whoe'er keeps me, let my heart be his guard;
Thou canst not then use rigor in my gaol:
  And yet thou wilt; for I, being pent in thee,
  Perforce am thine, and all that is in me.

CXXXIV.

So, now I have confess'd that he is thine,
And I myself am mortgaged to thy will,
Myself I'll forfeit, so that other mine
Thou wilt restore, to be my comfort still:
But thou wilt not, nor he will not be free,
For thou art covetous and he is kind;
He learn'd but surety-like to write for me
Under that bond that him as fast doth bind.
The statute of thy beauty thou wilt take,
Thou usurer, that put'st forth all to use,
And sue a friend came debtor for my sake;
So him I lose through my unkind abuse.
  Him have I lost; thou hast both him and me:
  He pays the whole, and yet am I not free.

CXXXV.

Whoever hath her wish, thou hast thy 'Will,'
And 'Will' to boot, and 'Will' in overplus;
More than enough am I that vex thee still,
To thy sweet will making addition thus.
Wilt thou, whose will is large and spacious,
Not once vouchsafe to hide my will in thine?
Shall will in others seem right gracious,
And in my will no fair acceptance shine?
The sea all water, yet receives rain still
And in abundance addeth to his store;
So thou, being rich in 'Will,' add to thy 'Will'
One will of mine, to make thy large 'Will' more.
  Let no unkind, no fair beseechers kill;
  Think all but one, and me in that one 'Will.'

CXXXVI.

If thy soul cheque thee that I come so near,
Swear to thy blind soul that I was thy 'Will,'
And will, thy soul knows, is admitted there;
Thus far for love my love-suit, sweet, fulfil.
'Will' will fulfil the treasure of thy love,
Ay, fill it full with wills, and my will one.
In things of great receipt with ease we prove
Among a number one is reckon'd none:
Then in the number let me pass untold,
Though in thy stores' account I one must be;
For nothing hold me, so it please thee hold
That nothing me, a something sweet to thee:
  Make but my name thy love, and love that still,
  And then thou lovest me, for my name is 'Will.'

CXXXVII.

Thou blind fool, Love, what dost thou to mine eyes,
That they behold, and see not what they see?
They know what beauty is, see where it lies,
Yet what the best is take the worst to be.
If eyes corrupt by over-partial looks
Be anchor'd in the bay where all men ride,
Why of eyes' falsehood hast thou forged hooks,
Whereto the judgment of my heart is tied?
Why should my heart think that a several plot
Which my heart knows the wide world's common place?
Or mine eyes seeing this, say this is not,
To put fair truth upon so foul a face?
  In things right true my heart and eyes have erred,
  And to this false plague are they now transferr'd.

CXXXVIII.

When my love swears that she is made of truth
I do believe her, though I know she lies,
That she might think me some untutor'd youth,
Unlearned in the world's false subtleties.
Thus vainly thinking that she thinks me young,
Although she knows my days are past the best,
Simply I credit her false speaking tongue:
On both sides thus is simple truth suppress'd.
But wherefore says she not she is unjust?
And wherefore say not I that I am old?
O, love's best habit is in seeming trust,
And age in love loves not to have years told:
  Therefore I lie with her and she with me,
  And in our faults by lies we flatter'd be.

CXXXIX.

O, call not me to justify the wrong
That thy unkindness lays upon my heart;
Wound me not with thine eye but with thy tongue;
Use power with power and slay me not by art.
Tell me thou lovest elsewhere, but in my sight,
Dear heart, forbear to glance thine eye aside:
What need'st thou wound with cunning when thy might
Is more than my o'er-press'd defense can bide?
Let me excuse thee: ah! my love well knows
Her pretty looks have been mine enemies,
And therefore from my face she turns my foes,
That they elsewhere might dart their injuries:
  Yet do not so; but since I am near slain,
  Kill me outright with looks and rid my pain.

CXL.

Be wise as thou art cruel; do not press
My tongue-tied patience with too much disdain;
Lest sorrow lend me words and words express
The manner of my pity-wanting pain.
If I might teach thee wit, better it were,
Though not to love, yet, love, to tell me so;
As testy sick men, when their deaths be near,
No news but health from their physicians know;
For if I should despair, I should grow mad,
And in my madness might speak ill of thee:
Now this ill-wresting world is grown so bad,
Mad slanderers by mad ears believed be,
  That I may not be so, nor thou belied,
  Bear thine eyes straight, though thy proud heart go wide.

CXLI.

In faith, I do not love thee with mine eyes,
For they in thee a thousand errors note;
But 'tis my heart that loves what they despise,
Who in despite of view is pleased to dote;
Nor are mine ears with thy tongue's tune delighted,
Nor tender feeling, to base touches prone,
Nor taste, nor smell, desire to be invited
To any sensual feast with thee alone:
But my five wits nor my five senses can
Dissuade one foolish heart from serving thee,
Who leaves unsway'd the likeness of a man,
Thy proud hearts slave and vassal wretch to be:
  Only my plague thus far I count my gain,
  That she that makes me sin awards me pain.

CXLII.

Love is my sin and thy dear virtue hate,
Hate of my sin, grounded on sinful loving:
O, but with mine compare thou thine own state,
And thou shalt find it merits not reproving;
Or, if it do, not from those lips of thine,
That have profaned their scarlet ornaments
And seal'd false bonds of love as oft as mine,
Robb'd others' beds' revenues of their rents.
Be it lawful I love thee, as thou lovest those
Whom thine eyes woo as mine importune thee:
Root pity in thy heart, that when it grows
Thy pity may deserve to pitied be.
  If thou dost seek to have what thou dost hide,
  By self-example mayst thou be denied!

CXLIII.

Lo! as a careful housewife runs to catch
One of her feather'd creatures broke away,
Sets down her babe and makes an swift dispatch
In pursuit of the thing she would have stay,
Whilst her neglected child holds her in chase,
Cries to catch her whose busy care is bent
To follow that which flies before her face,
Not prizing her poor infant's discontent;
So runn'st thou after that which flies from thee,
Whilst I thy babe chase thee afar behind;
But if thou catch thy hope, turn back to me,
And play the mother's part, kiss me, be kind:
  So will I pray that thou mayst have thy 'Will,'
  If thou turn back, and my loud crying still.

CXLIV.

Two loves I have of comfort and despair,
Which like two spirits do suggest me still:
The better angel is a man right fair,
The worser spirit a woman colour'd ill.
To win me soon to hell, my female evil
Tempteth my better angel from my side,
And would corrupt my saint to be a devil,
Wooing his purity with her foul pride.
And whether that my angel be turn'd fiend
Suspect I may, but not directly tell;
But being both from me, both to each friend,
I guess one angel in another's hell:
  Yet this shall I ne'er know, but live in doubt,
  Till my bad angel fire my good one out.

CXLV.

Those lips that Love's own hand did make
Breathed forth the sound that said 'I hate'
To me that languish'd for her sake;
But when she saw my woeful state,
Straight in her heart did mercy come,
Chiding that tongue that ever sweet
Was used in giving gentle doom,
And taught it thus anew to greet:
'I hate' she alter'd with an end,
That follow'd it as gentle day
Doth follow night, who like a fiend
From heaven to hell is flown away;
  'I hate' from hate away she threw,
  And saved my life, saying 'not you.'

CXLVI.

Poor soul, the centre of my sinful earth,
[         ] these rebel powers that thee array;
Why dost thou pine within and suffer dearth,
Painting thy outward walls so costly gay?
Why so large cost, having so short a lease,
Dost thou upon thy fading mansion spend?
Shall worms, inheritors of this excess,
Eat up thy charge? is this thy body's end?
Then soul, live thou upon thy servant's loss,
And let that pine to aggravate thy store;
Buy terms divine in selling hours of dross;
Within be fed, without be rich no more:
  So shalt thou feed on Death, that feeds on men,
  And Death once dead, there's no more dying then.

CXLVII.

My love is as a fever, longing still
For that which longer nurseth the disease,
Feeding on that which doth preserve the ill,
The uncertain sickly appetite to please.
My reason, the physician to my love,
Angry that his prescriptions are not kept,
Hath left me, and I desperate now approve
Desire is death, which physic did except.
Past cure I am, now reason is past care,
And frantic-mad with evermore unrest;
My thoughts and my discourse as madmen's are,
At random from the truth vainly express'd;
  For I have sworn thee fair and thought thee bright,
  Who art as black as hell, as dark as night.

CXLVIII.

O me, what eyes hath Love put in my head,
Which have no correspondence with true sight!
Or, if they have, where is my judgment fled,
That censures falsely what they see aright?
If that be fair whereon my false eyes dote,
What means the world to say it is not so?
If it be not, then love doth well denote
Love's eye is not so true as all men's 'No.'
How can it? O, how can Love's eye be true,
That is so vex'd with watching and with tears?
No marvel then, though I mistake my view;
The sun itself sees not till heaven clears.
  O cunning Love! with tears thou keep'st me blind,
  Lest eyes well-seeing thy foul faults should find.

CXLIX.

Canst thou, O cruel! say I love thee not,
When I against myself with thee partake?
Do I not think on thee, when I forgot
Am of myself, all tyrant, for thy sake?
Who hateth thee that I do call my friend?
On whom frown'st thou that I do fawn upon?
Nay, if thou lour'st on me, do I not spend
Revenge upon myself with present moan?
What merit do I in myself respect,
That is so proud thy service to despise,
When all my best doth worship thy defect,
Commanded by the motion of thine eyes?
  But, love, hate on, for now I know thy mind;
  Those that can see thou lovest, and I am blind.

CL.

O, from what power hast thou this powerful might
With insufficiency my heart to sway?
To make me give the lie to my true sight,
And swear that brightness doth not grace the day?
Whence hast thou this becoming of things ill,
That in the very refuse of thy deeds
There is such strength and warrantize of skill
That, in my mind, thy worst all best exceeds?
Who taught thee how to make me love thee more
The more I hear and see just cause of hate?
O, though I love what others do abhor,
With others thou shouldst not abhor my state:
  If thy unworthiness raised love in me,
  More worthy I to be beloved of thee.

CLI.

Love is too young to know what conscience is;
Yet who knows not conscience is born of love?
Then, gentle cheater, urge not my amiss,
Lest guilty of my faults thy sweet self prove:
For, thou betraying me, I do betray
My nobler part to my gross body's treason;
My soul doth tell my body that he may
Triumph in love; flesh stays no father reason;
But, rising at thy name, doth point out thee
As his triumphant prize. Proud of this pride,
He is contented thy poor drudge to be,
To stand in thy affairs, fall by thy side.
  No want of conscience hold it that I call
  Her 'love' for whose dear love I rise and fall.

CLII.

In loving thee thou know'st I am forsworn,
But thou art twice forsworn, to me love swearing,
In act thy bed-vow broke and new faith torn,
In vowing new hate after new love bearing.
But why of two oaths' breach do I accuse thee,
When I break twenty? I am perjured most;
For all my vows are oaths but to misuse thee
And all my honest faith in thee is lost,
For I have sworn deep oaths of thy deep kindness,
Oaths of thy love, thy truth, thy constancy,
And, to enlighten thee, gave eyes to blindness,
Or made them swear against the thing they see;
  For I have sworn thee fair; more perjured I,
  To swear against the truth so foul a lie!

CLIII.

Cupid laid by his brand, and fell asleep:
A maid of Dian's this advantage found,
And his love-kindling fire did quickly steep
In a cold valley-fountain of that ground;
Which borrow'd from this holy fire of Love
A dateless lively heat, still to endure,
And grew a seething bath, which yet men prove
Against strange maladies a sovereign cure.
But at my mistress' eye Love's brand new-fired,
The boy for trial needs would touch my breast;
I, sick withal, the help of bath desired,
And thither hied, a sad distemper'd guest,
  But found no cure: the bath for my help lies
  Where Cupid got new fire--my mistress' eyes.

CLIV.

The little Love-god lying once asleep
Laid by his side his heart-inflaming brand,
Whilst many nymphs that vow'd chaste life to keep
Came tripping by; but in her maiden hand
The fairest votary took up that fire
Which many legions of true hearts had warm'd;
And so the general of hot desire
Was sleeping by a virgin hand disarm'd.
This brand she quenched in a cool well by,
Which from Love's fire took heat perpetual,
Growing a bath and healthful remedy
For men diseased; but I, my mistress' thrall,
  Came there for cure, and this by that I prove,
  Love's fire heats water, water cools not love.


	MACBETH


	DRAMATIS PERSONAE


DUNCAN	king of Scotland.


MALCOLM	|
	|  his sons.
DONALBAIN	|


MACBETH	|
	|  generals of the king's army.
BANQUO	|


MACDUFF	|
	|
LENNOX	|
	|
ROSS	|
	|  noblemen of Scotland.
MENTEITH	|
	|
ANGUS	|
	|
CAITHNESS	|


FLEANCE	son to Banquo.

SIWARD	Earl of Northumberland, general of the English forces.

YOUNG SIWARD	his son.

SEYTON	an officer attending on Macbeth.

	Boy, son to Macduff. (Son:)

	An English Doctor. (Doctor:)

	A Scotch Doctor. (Doctor:)

	A Soldier.
	A Porter.

	An Old Man

LADY MACBETH:

LADY MACDUFF:

	Gentlewoman attending on Lady Macbeth. (Gentlewoman:)

HECATE:

	Three Witches.
	(First Witch:)
	(Second Witch:)
	(Third Witch:)

	Apparitions.
	(First Apparition:)
	(Second Apparition:)
	(Third Apparition:)

	Lords, Gentlemen, Officers, Soldiers, Murderers,
	Attendants, and Messengers. (Lord:)
	(Sergeant:)
	(Servant:)
	(First Murderer:)
	(Second Murderer:)
	(Third Murderer:)
	(Messenger:)

SCENE	Scotland: England.




	MACBETH


ACT I



SCENE I	A desert place.


	[Thunder and lightning. Enter three Witches]

First Witch	When shall we three meet again
	In thunder, lightning, or in rain?

Second Witch	When the hurlyburly's done,
	When the battle's lost and won.

Third Witch	That will be ere the set of sun.

First Witch	Where the place?

Second Witch	                  Upon the heath.

Third Witch	There to meet with Macbeth.

First Witch	I come, Graymalkin!

Second Witch	Paddock calls.

Third Witch	Anon.

ALL	Fair is foul, and foul is fair:
	Hover through the fog and filthy air.

	[Exeunt]




	MACBETH


ACT I



SCENE II	A camp near Forres.


	[Alarum within. Enter DUNCAN, MALCOLM, DONALBAIN,
	LENNOX, with Attendants, meeting a bleeding Sergeant]

DUNCAN	What bloody man is that? He can report,
	As seemeth by his plight, of the revolt
	The newest state.

MALCOLM	                  This is the sergeant
	Who like a good and hardy soldier fought
	'Gainst my captivity. Hail, brave friend!
	Say to the king the knowledge of the broil
	As thou didst leave it.

Sergeant	Doubtful it stood;
	As two spent swimmers, that do cling together
	And choke their art. The merciless Macdonwald--
	Worthy to be a rebel, for to that
	The multiplying villanies of nature
	Do swarm upon him--from the western isles
	Of kerns and gallowglasses is supplied;
	And fortune, on his damned quarrel smiling,
	Show'd like a rebel's whore: but all's too weak:
	For brave Macbeth--well he deserves that name--
	Disdaining fortune, with his brandish'd steel,
	Which smoked with bloody execution,
	Like valour's minion carved out his passage
	Till he faced the slave;
	Which ne'er shook hands, nor bade farewell to him,
	Till he unseam'd him from the nave to the chaps,
	And fix'd his head upon our battlements.

DUNCAN	O valiant cousin! worthy gentleman!

Sergeant	As whence the sun 'gins his reflection
	Shipwrecking storms and direful thunders break,
	So from that spring whence comfort seem'd to come
	Discomfort swells. Mark, king of Scotland, mark:
	No sooner justice had with valour arm'd
	Compell'd these skipping kerns to trust their heels,
	But the Norweyan lord surveying vantage,
	With furbish'd arms and new supplies of men
	Began a fresh assault.

DUNCAN	Dismay'd not this
	Our captains, Macbeth and Banquo?

Sergeant	Yes;
	As sparrows eagles, or the hare the lion.
	If I say sooth, I must report they were
	As cannons overcharged with double cracks, so they
	Doubly redoubled strokes upon the foe:
	Except they meant to bathe in reeking wounds,
	Or memorise another Golgotha,
	I cannot tell.
	But I am faint, my gashes cry for help.

DUNCAN	So well thy words become thee as thy wounds;
	They smack of honour both. Go get him surgeons.

	[Exit Sergeant, attended]

	Who comes here?

	[Enter ROSS]

MALCOLM	                  The worthy thane of Ross.

LENNOX	What a haste looks through his eyes! So should he look
	That seems to speak things strange.

ROSS	God save the king!

DUNCAN	Whence camest thou, worthy thane?

ROSS	From Fife, great king;
	Where the Norweyan banners flout the sky
	And fan our people cold. Norway himself,
	With terrible numbers,
	Assisted by that most disloyal traitor
	The thane of Cawdor, began a dismal conflict;
	Till that Bellona's bridegroom, lapp'd in proof,
	Confronted him with self-comparisons,
	Point against point rebellious, arm 'gainst arm.
	Curbing his lavish spirit: and, to conclude,
	The victory fell on us.

DUNCAN	Great happiness!

ROSS	That now
	Sweno, the Norways' king, craves composition:
	Nor would we deign him burial of his men
	Till he disbursed at Saint Colme's inch
	Ten thousand dollars to our general use.

DUNCAN	No more that thane of Cawdor shall deceive
	Our bosom interest: go pronounce his present death,
	And with his former title greet Macbeth.

ROSS	I'll see it done.

DUNCAN	What he hath lost noble Macbeth hath won.

	[Exeunt]




	MACBETH


ACT I



SCENE III	A heath near Forres.


	[Thunder. Enter the three Witches]

First Witch	Where hast thou been, sister?

Second Witch	Killing swine.

Third Witch	Sister, where thou?

First Witch	A sailor's wife had chestnuts in her lap,
	And munch'd, and munch'd, and munch'd:--
	'Give me,' quoth I:
	'Aroint thee, witch!' the rump-fed ronyon cries.
	Her husband's to Aleppo gone, master o' the Tiger:
	But in a sieve I'll thither sail,
	And, like a rat without a tail,
	I'll do, I'll do, and I'll do.

Second Witch	I'll give thee a wind.

First Witch	Thou'rt kind.

Third Witch	And I another.

First Witch	I myself have all the other,
	And the very ports they blow,
	All the quarters that they know
	I' the shipman's card.
	I will drain him dry as hay:
	Sleep shall neither night nor day
	Hang upon his pent-house lid;
	He shall live a man forbid:
	Weary se'nnights nine times nine
	Shall he dwindle, peak and pine:
	Though his bark cannot be lost,
	Yet it shall be tempest-tost.
	Look what I have.

Second Witch	Show me, show me.

First Witch	Here I have a pilot's thumb,
	Wreck'd as homeward he did come.

	[Drum within]

Third Witch	A drum, a drum!
	Macbeth doth come.

ALL	The weird sisters, hand in hand,
	Posters of the sea and land,
	Thus do go about, about:
	Thrice to thine and thrice to mine
	And thrice again, to make up nine.
	Peace! the charm's wound up.

	[Enter MACBETH and BANQUO]

MACBETH	So foul and fair a day I have not seen.

BANQUO	How far is't call'd to Forres? What are these
	So wither'd and so wild in their attire,
	That look not like the inhabitants o' the earth,
	And yet are on't? Live you? or are you aught
	That man may question? You seem to understand me,
	By each at once her chappy finger laying
	Upon her skinny lips: you should be women,
	And yet your beards forbid me to interpret
	That you are so.

MACBETH	                  Speak, if you can: what are you?

First Witch	All hail, Macbeth! hail to thee, thane of Glamis!

Second Witch	All hail, Macbeth, hail to thee, thane of Cawdor!

Third Witch	All hail, Macbeth, thou shalt be king hereafter!

BANQUO	Good sir, why do you start; and seem to fear
	Things that do sound so fair? I' the name of truth,
	Are ye fantastical, or that indeed
	Which outwardly ye show? My noble partner
	You greet with present grace and great prediction
	Of noble having and of royal hope,
	That he seems rapt withal: to me you speak not.
	If you can look into the seeds of time,
	And say which grain will grow and which will not,
	Speak then to me, who neither beg nor fear
	Your favours nor your hate.

First Witch	Hail!

Second Witch	Hail!

Third Witch	Hail!

First Witch	Lesser than Macbeth, and greater.

Second Witch	Not so happy, yet much happier.

Third Witch	Thou shalt get kings, though thou be none:
	So all hail, Macbeth and Banquo!

First Witch	Banquo and Macbeth, all hail!

MACBETH	Stay, you imperfect speakers, tell me more:
	By Sinel's death I know I am thane of Glamis;
	But how of Cawdor? the thane of Cawdor lives,
	A prosperous gentleman; and to be king
	Stands not within the prospect of belief,
	No more than to be Cawdor. Say from whence
	You owe this strange intelligence? or why
	Upon this blasted heath you stop our way
	With such prophetic greeting? Speak, I charge you.

	[Witches vanish]

BANQUO	The earth hath bubbles, as the water has,
	And these are of them. Whither are they vanish'd?

MACBETH	Into the air; and what seem'd corporal melted
	As breath into the wind. Would they had stay'd!

BANQUO	Were such things here as we do speak about?
	Or have we eaten on the insane root
	That takes the reason prisoner?

MACBETH	Your children shall be kings.

BANQUO	You shall be king.

MACBETH	And thane of Cawdor too: went it not so?

BANQUO	To the selfsame tune and words. Who's here?

	[Enter ROSS and ANGUS]

ROSS	The king hath happily received, Macbeth,
	The news of thy success; and when he reads
	Thy personal venture in the rebels' fight,
	His wonders and his praises do contend
	Which should be thine or his: silenced with that,
	In viewing o'er the rest o' the selfsame day,
	He finds thee in the stout Norweyan ranks,
	Nothing afeard of what thyself didst make,
	Strange images of death. As thick as hail
	Came post with post; and every one did bear
	Thy praises in his kingdom's great defence,
	And pour'd them down before him.

ANGUS	We are sent
	To give thee from our royal master thanks;
	Only to herald thee into his sight,
	Not pay thee.

ROSS	And, for an earnest of a greater honour,
	He bade me, from him, call thee thane of Cawdor:
	In which addition, hail, most worthy thane!
	For it is thine.

BANQUO	                  What, can the devil speak true?

MACBETH	The thane of Cawdor lives: why do you dress me
	In borrow'd robes?

ANGUS	                  Who was the thane lives yet;
	But under heavy judgment bears that life
	Which he deserves to lose. Whether he was combined
	With those of Norway, or did line the rebel
	With hidden help and vantage, or that with both
	He labour'd in his country's wreck, I know not;
	But treasons capital, confess'd and proved,
	Have overthrown him.

MACBETH	[Aside]  Glamis, and thane of Cawdor!
	The greatest is behind.

	[To ROSS and ANGUS]

		  Thanks for your pains.

	[To BANQUO]

	Do you not hope your children shall be kings,
	When those that gave the thane of Cawdor to me
	Promised no less to them?

BANQUO	That trusted home
	Might yet enkindle you unto the crown,
	Besides the thane of Cawdor. But 'tis strange:
	And oftentimes, to win us to our harm,
	The instruments of darkness tell us truths,
	Win us with honest trifles, to betray's
	In deepest consequence.
	Cousins, a word, I pray you.

MACBETH	[Aside]	Two truths are told,
	As happy prologues to the swelling act
	Of the imperial theme.--I thank you, gentlemen.

	[Aside]  This supernatural soliciting
	Cannot be ill, cannot be good: if ill,
	Why hath it given me earnest of success,
	Commencing in a truth? I am thane of Cawdor:
	If good, why do I yield to that suggestion
	Whose horrid image doth unfix my hair
	And make my seated heart knock at my ribs,
	Against the use of nature? Present fears
	Are less than horrible imaginings:
	My thought, whose murder yet is but fantastical,
	Shakes so my single state of man that function
	Is smother'd in surmise, and nothing is
	But what is not.

BANQUO	                  Look, how our partner's rapt.

MACBETH	[Aside]  If chance will have me king, why, chance may crown me,
	Without my stir.

BANQUO	                  New horrors come upon him,
	Like our strange garments, cleave not to their mould
	But with the aid of use.

MACBETH	[Aside]                Come what come may,
	Time and the hour runs through the roughest day.

BANQUO	Worthy Macbeth, we stay upon your leisure.

MACBETH	Give me your favour: my dull brain was wrought
	With things forgotten. Kind gentlemen, your pains
	Are register'd where every day I turn
	The leaf to read them. Let us toward the king.
	Think upon what hath chanced, and, at more time,
	The interim having weigh'd it, let us speak
	Our free hearts each to other.

BANQUO	Very gladly.

MACBETH	Till then, enough. Come, friends.

	[Exeunt]




	MACBETH


ACT I



SCENE IV	Forres. The palace.


	[Flourish. Enter DUNCAN, MALCOLM, DONALBAIN, LENNOX,
	and Attendants]

DUNCAN	Is execution done on Cawdor? Are not
	Those in commission yet return'd?

MALCOLM	My liege,
	They are not yet come back. But I have spoke
	With one that saw him die: who did report
	That very frankly he confess'd his treasons,
	Implored your highness' pardon and set forth
	A deep repentance: nothing in his life
	Became him like the leaving it; he died
	As one that had been studied in his death
	To throw away the dearest thing he owed,
	As 'twere a careless trifle.

DUNCAN	There's no art
	To find the mind's construction in the face:
	He was a gentleman on whom I built
	An absolute trust.

	[Enter MACBETH, BANQUO, ROSS, and ANGUS]

	O worthiest cousin!
	The sin of my ingratitude even now
	Was heavy on me: thou art so far before
	That swiftest wing of recompense is slow
	To overtake thee. Would thou hadst less deserved,
	That the proportion both of thanks and payment
	Might have been mine! only I have left to say,
	More is thy due than more than all can pay.

MACBETH	The service and the loyalty I owe,
	In doing it, pays itself. Your highness' part
	Is to receive our duties; and our duties
	Are to your throne and state children and servants,
	Which do but what they should, by doing every thing
	Safe toward your love and honour.

DUNCAN	Welcome hither:
	I have begun to plant thee, and will labour
	To make thee full of growing. Noble Banquo,
	That hast no less deserved, nor must be known
	No less to have done so, let me enfold thee
	And hold thee to my heart.

BANQUO	There if I grow,
	The harvest is your own.

DUNCAN	My plenteous joys,
	Wanton in fulness, seek to hide themselves
	In drops of sorrow. Sons, kinsmen, thanes,
	And you whose places are the nearest, know
	We will establish our estate upon
	Our eldest, Malcolm, whom we name hereafter
	The Prince of Cumberland; which honour must
	Not unaccompanied invest him only,
	But signs of nobleness, like stars, shall shine
	On all deservers. From hence to Inverness,
	And bind us further to you.

MACBETH	The rest is labour, which is not used for you:
	I'll be myself the harbinger and make joyful
	The hearing of my wife with your approach;
	So humbly take my leave.

DUNCAN	My worthy Cawdor!

MACBETH	[Aside]  The Prince of Cumberland! that is a step
	On which I must fall down, or else o'erleap,
	For in my way it lies. Stars, hide your fires;
	Let not light see my black and deep desires:
	The eye wink at the hand; yet let that be,
	Which the eye fears, when it is done, to see.

	[Exit]

DUNCAN	True, worthy Banquo; he is full so valiant,
	And in his commendations I am fed;
	It is a banquet to me. Let's after him,
	Whose care is gone before to bid us welcome:
	It is a peerless kinsman.

	[Flourish. Exeunt]




	MACBETH


ACT I



SCENE V	Inverness. Macbeth's castle.


	[Enter LADY MACBETH, reading a letter]

LADY MACBETH	'They met me in the day of success: and I have
	learned by the perfectest report, they have more in
	them than mortal knowledge. When I burned in desire
	to question them further, they made themselves air,
	into which they vanished. Whiles I stood rapt in
	the wonder of it, came missives from the king, who
	all-hailed me 'Thane of Cawdor;' by which title,
	before, these weird sisters saluted me, and referred
	me to the coming on of time, with 'Hail, king that
	shalt be!' This have I thought good to deliver
	thee, my dearest partner of greatness, that thou
	mightst not lose the dues of rejoicing, by being
	ignorant of what greatness is promised thee. Lay it
	to thy heart, and farewell.'
	Glamis thou art, and Cawdor; and shalt be
	What thou art promised: yet do I fear thy nature;
	It is too full o' the milk of human kindness
	To catch the nearest way: thou wouldst be great;
	Art not without ambition, but without
	The illness should attend it: what thou wouldst highly,
	That wouldst thou holily; wouldst not play false,
	And yet wouldst wrongly win: thou'ldst have, great Glamis,
	That which cries 'Thus thou must do, if thou have it;
	And that which rather thou dost fear to do
	Than wishest should be undone.' Hie thee hither,
	That I may pour my spirits in thine ear;
	And chastise with the valour of my tongue
	All that impedes thee from the golden round,
	Which fate and metaphysical aid doth seem
	To have thee crown'd withal.

	[Enter a Messenger]

		       What is your tidings?

Messenger	The king comes here to-night.

LADY MACBETH	Thou'rt mad to say it:
	Is not thy master with him? who, were't so,
	Would have inform'd for preparation.

Messenger	So please you, it is true: our thane is coming:
	One of my fellows had the speed of him,
	Who, almost dead for breath, had scarcely more
	Than would make up his message.

LADY MACBETH	Give him tending;
	He brings great news.

	[Exit Messenger]

		The raven himself is hoarse
	That croaks the fatal entrance of Duncan
	Under my battlements. Come, you spirits
	That tend on mortal thoughts, unsex me here,
	And fill me from the crown to the toe top-full
	Of direst cruelty! make thick my blood;
	Stop up the access and passage to remorse,
	That no compunctious visitings of nature
	Shake my fell purpose, nor keep peace between
	The effect and it! Come to my woman's breasts,
	And take my milk for gall, you murdering ministers,
	Wherever in your sightless substances
	You wait on nature's mischief! Come, thick night,
	And pall thee in the dunnest smoke of hell,
	That my keen knife see not the wound it makes,
	Nor heaven peep through the blanket of the dark,
	To cry 'Hold, hold!'

	[Enter MACBETH]

		Great Glamis! worthy Cawdor!
	Greater than both, by the all-hail hereafter!
	Thy letters have transported me beyond
	This ignorant present, and I feel now
	The future in the instant.

MACBETH	My dearest love,
	Duncan comes here to-night.

LADY MACBETH	And when goes hence?

MACBETH	To-morrow, as he purposes.

LADY MACBETH	O, never
	Shall sun that morrow see!
	Your face, my thane, is as a book where men
	May read strange matters. To beguile the time,
	Look like the time; bear welcome in your eye,
	Your hand, your tongue: look like the innocent flower,
	But be the serpent under't. He that's coming
	Must be provided for: and you shall put
	This night's great business into my dispatch;
	Which shall to all our nights and days to come
	Give solely sovereign sway and masterdom.

MACBETH	We will speak further.

LADY MACBETH	Only look up clear;
	To alter favour ever is to fear:
	Leave all the rest to me.

	[Exeunt]




	MACBETH


ACT I



SCENE VI	Before Macbeth's castle.


	[Hautboys and torches. Enter DUNCAN, MALCOLM,
	DONALBAIN, BANQUO, LENNOX, MACDUFF, ROSS, ANGUS,
	and Attendants]

DUNCAN	This castle hath a pleasant seat; the air
	Nimbly and sweetly recommends itself
	Unto our gentle senses.

BANQUO	This guest of summer,
	The temple-haunting martlet, does approve,
	By his loved mansionry, that the heaven's breath
	Smells wooingly here: no jutty, frieze,
	Buttress, nor coign of vantage, but this bird
	Hath made his pendent bed and procreant cradle:
	Where they most breed and haunt, I have observed,
	The air is delicate.

	[Enter LADY MACBETH]

DUNCAN	See, see, our honour'd hostess!
	The love that follows us sometime is our trouble,
	Which still we thank as love. Herein I teach you
	How you shall bid God 'ild us for your pains,
	And thank us for your trouble.

LADY MACBETH	All our service
	In every point twice done and then done double
	Were poor and single business to contend
	Against those honours deep and broad wherewith
	Your majesty loads our house: for those of old,
	And the late dignities heap'd up to them,
	We rest your hermits.

DUNCAN	Where's the thane of Cawdor?
	We coursed him at the heels, and had a purpose
	To be his purveyor: but he rides well;
	And his great love, sharp as his spur, hath holp him
	To his home before us. Fair and noble hostess,
	We are your guest to-night.

LADY MACBETH	Your servants ever
	Have theirs, themselves and what is theirs, in compt,
	To make their audit at your highness' pleasure,
	Still to return your own.

DUNCAN	Give me your hand;
	Conduct me to mine host: we love him highly,
	And shall continue our graces towards him.
	By your leave, hostess.

	[Exeunt]




	MACBETH


ACT I



SCENE VII	Macbeth's castle.


	[Hautboys and torches. Enter a Sewer, and divers
	Servants with dishes and service, and pass over the
	stage. Then enter MACBETH]

MACBETH	If it were done when 'tis done, then 'twere well
	It were done quickly: if the assassination
	Could trammel up the consequence, and catch
	With his surcease success; that but this blow
	Might be the be-all and the end-all here,
	But here, upon this bank and shoal of time,
	We'ld jump the life to come. But in these cases
	We still have judgment here; that we but teach
	Bloody instructions, which, being taught, return
	To plague the inventor: this even-handed justice
	Commends the ingredients of our poison'd chalice
	To our own lips. He's here in double trust;
	First, as I am his kinsman and his subject,
	Strong both against the deed; then, as his host,
	Who should against his murderer shut the door,
	Not bear the knife myself. Besides, this Duncan
	Hath borne his faculties so meek, hath been
	So clear in his great office, that his virtues
	Will plead like angels, trumpet-tongued, against
	The deep damnation of his taking-off;
	And pity, like a naked new-born babe,
	Striding the blast, or heaven's cherubim, horsed
	Upon the sightless couriers of the air,
	Shall blow the horrid deed in every eye,
	That tears shall drown the wind. I have no spur
	To prick the sides of my intent, but only
	Vaulting ambition, which o'erleaps itself
	And falls on the other.

	[Enter LADY MACBETH]

		  How now! what news?

LADY MACBETH	He has almost supp'd: why have you left the chamber?

MACBETH	Hath he ask'd for me?

LADY MACBETH	Know you not he has?

MACBETH	We will proceed no further in this business:
	He hath honour'd me of late; and I have bought
	Golden opinions from all sorts of people,
	Which would be worn now in their newest gloss,
	Not cast aside so soon.

LADY MACBETH	Was the hope drunk
	Wherein you dress'd yourself? hath it slept since?
	And wakes it now, to look so green and pale
	At what it did so freely? From this time
	Such I account thy love. Art thou afeard
	To be the same in thine own act and valour
	As thou art in desire? Wouldst thou have that
	Which thou esteem'st the ornament of life,
	And live a coward in thine own esteem,
	Letting 'I dare not' wait upon 'I would,'
	Like the poor cat i' the adage?

MACBETH	Prithee, peace:
	I dare do all that may become a man;
	Who dares do more is none.
LADY MACBETH	What beast was't, then,
	That made you break this enterprise to me?
	When you durst do it, then you were a man;
	And, to be more than what you were, you would
	Be so much more the man. Nor time nor place
	Did then adhere, and yet you would make both:
	They have made themselves, and that their fitness now
	Does unmake you. I have given suck, and know
	How tender 'tis to love the babe that milks me:
	I would, while it was smiling in my face,
	Have pluck'd my nipple from his boneless gums,
	And dash'd the brains out, had I so sworn as you
	Have done to this.

MACBETH	                  If we should fail?

LADY MACBETH	We fail!
	But screw your courage to the sticking-place,
	And we'll not fail. When Duncan is asleep--
	Whereto the rather shall his day's hard journey
	Soundly invite him--his two chamberlains
	Will I with wine and wassail so convince
	That memory, the warder of the brain,
	Shall be a fume, and the receipt of reason
	A limbeck only: when in swinish sleep
	Their drenched natures lie as in a death,
	What cannot you and I perform upon
	The unguarded Duncan? what not put upon
	His spongy officers, who shall bear the guilt
	Of our great quell?

MACBETH	Bring forth men-children only;
	For thy undaunted mettle should compose
	Nothing but males. Will it not be received,
	When we have mark'd with blood those sleepy two
	Of his own chamber and used their very daggers,
	That they have done't?

LADY MACBETH	Who dares receive it other,
	As we shall make our griefs and clamour roar
	Upon his death?

MACBETH	                  I am settled, and bend up
	Each corporal agent to this terrible feat.
	Away, and mock the time with fairest show:
	False face must hide what the false heart doth know.

	[Exeunt]




	MACBETH


ACT II



SCENE I	Court of Macbeth's castle.


	[Enter BANQUO, and FLEANCE bearing a torch before him]

BANQUO	How goes the night, boy?

FLEANCE	The moon is down; I have not heard the clock.

BANQUO	And she goes down at twelve.

FLEANCE	I take't, 'tis later, sir.

BANQUO	Hold, take my sword. There's husbandry in heaven;
	Their candles are all out. Take thee that too.
	A heavy summons lies like lead upon me,
	And yet I would not sleep: merciful powers,
	Restrain in me the cursed thoughts that nature
	Gives way to in repose!

	[Enter MACBETH, and a Servant with a torch]

		  Give me my sword.
	Who's there?

MACBETH	A friend.

BANQUO	What, sir, not yet at rest? The king's a-bed:
	He hath been in unusual pleasure, and
	Sent forth great largess to your offices.
	This diamond he greets your wife withal,
	By the name of most kind hostess; and shut up
	In measureless content.

MACBETH	Being unprepared,
	Our will became the servant to defect;
	Which else should free have wrought.

BANQUO	All's well.
	I dreamt last night of the three weird sisters:
	To you they have show'd some truth.

MACBETH	I think not of them:
	Yet, when we can entreat an hour to serve,
	We would spend it in some words upon that business,
	If you would grant the time.

BANQUO	At your kind'st leisure.

MACBETH	If you shall cleave to my consent, when 'tis,
	It shall make honour for you.

BANQUO	So I lose none
	In seeking to augment it, but still keep
	My bosom franchised and allegiance clear,
	I shall be counsell'd.

MACBETH	Good repose the while!

BANQUO	Thanks, sir: the like to you!

	[Exeunt BANQUO and FLEANCE]

MACBETH	Go bid thy mistress, when my drink is ready,
	She strike upon the bell. Get thee to bed.

	[Exit Servant]

	Is this a dagger which I see before me,
	The handle toward my hand? Come, let me clutch thee.
	I have thee not, and yet I see thee still.
	Art thou not, fatal vision, sensible
	To feeling as to sight? or art thou but
	A dagger of the mind, a false creation,
	Proceeding from the heat-oppressed brain?
	I see thee yet, in form as palpable
	As this which now I draw.
	Thou marshall'st me the way that I was going;
	And such an instrument I was to use.
	Mine eyes are made the fools o' the other senses,
	Or else worth all the rest; I see thee still,
	And on thy blade and dudgeon gouts of blood,
	Which was not so before. There's no such thing:
	It is the bloody business which informs
	Thus to mine eyes. Now o'er the one halfworld
	Nature seems dead, and wicked dreams abuse
	The curtain'd sleep; witchcraft celebrates
	Pale Hecate's offerings, and wither'd murder,
	Alarum'd by his sentinel, the wolf,
	Whose howl's his watch, thus with his stealthy pace.
	With Tarquin's ravishing strides, towards his design
	Moves like a ghost. Thou sure and firm-set earth,
	Hear not my steps, which way they walk, for fear
	Thy very stones prate of my whereabout,
	And take the present horror from the time,
	Which now suits with it. Whiles I threat, he lives:
	Words to the heat of deeds too cold breath gives.

	[A bell rings]

	I go, and it is done; the bell invites me.
	Hear it not, Duncan; for it is a knell
	That summons thee to heaven or to hell.

	[Exit]




	MACBETH


ACT II



SCENE II	The same.


	[Enter LADY MACBETH]

LADY MACBETH	That which hath made them drunk hath made me bold;
	What hath quench'd them hath given me fire.
	Hark! Peace!
	It was the owl that shriek'd, the fatal bellman,
	Which gives the stern'st good-night. He is about it:
	The doors are open; and the surfeited grooms
	Do mock their charge with snores: I have drugg'd
	their possets,
	That death and nature do contend about them,
	Whether they live or die.

MACBETH	[Within]  Who's there? what, ho!

LADY MACBETH	Alack, I am afraid they have awaked,
	And 'tis not done. The attempt and not the deed
	Confounds us. Hark! I laid their daggers ready;
	He could not miss 'em. Had he not resembled
	My father as he slept, I had done't.

	[Enter MACBETH]

		                  My husband!

MACBETH	I have done the deed. Didst thou not hear a noise?

LADY MACBETH	I heard the owl scream and the crickets cry.
	Did not you speak?

MACBETH	                  When?

LADY MACBETH	Now.

MACBETH	As I descended?

LADY MACBETH	Ay.

MACBETH	Hark!
	Who lies i' the second chamber?

LADY MACBETH	Donalbain.

MACBETH	This is a sorry sight.

	[Looking on his hands]

LADY MACBETH	A foolish thought, to say a sorry sight.

MACBETH	There's one did laugh in's sleep, and one cried
	'Murder!'
	That they did wake each other: I stood and heard them:
	But they did say their prayers, and address'd them
	Again to sleep.

LADY MACBETH	                  There are two lodged together.

MACBETH	One cried 'God bless us!' and 'Amen' the other;
	As they had seen me with these hangman's hands.
	Listening their fear, I could not say 'Amen,'
	When they did say 'God bless us!'

LADY MACBETH	Consider it not so deeply.

MACBETH	But wherefore could not I pronounce 'Amen'?
	I had most need of blessing, and 'Amen'
	Stuck in my throat.

LADY MACBETH	These deeds must not be thought
	After these ways; so, it will make us mad.

MACBETH	Methought I heard a voice cry 'Sleep no more!
	Macbeth does murder sleep', the innocent sleep,
	Sleep that knits up the ravell'd sleeve of care,
	The death of each day's life, sore labour's bath,
	Balm of hurt minds, great nature's second course,
	Chief nourisher in life's feast,--

LADY MACBETH	What do you mean?

MACBETH	Still it cried 'Sleep no more!' to all the house:
	'Glamis hath murder'd sleep, and therefore Cawdor
	Shall sleep no more; Macbeth shall sleep no more.'

LADY MACBETH	Who was it that thus cried? Why, worthy thane,
	You do unbend your noble strength, to think
	So brainsickly of things. Go get some water,
	And wash this filthy witness from your hand.
	Why did you bring these daggers from the place?
	They must lie there: go carry them; and smear
	The sleepy grooms with blood.

MACBETH	I'll go no more:
	I am afraid to think what I have done;
	Look on't again I dare not.

LADY MACBETH	Infirm of purpose!
	Give me the daggers: the sleeping and the dead
	Are but as pictures: 'tis the eye of childhood
	That fears a painted devil. If he do bleed,
	I'll gild the faces of the grooms withal;
	For it must seem their guilt.

	[Exit. Knocking within]

MACBETH	Whence is that knocking?
	How is't with me, when every noise appals me?
	What hands are here? ha! they pluck out mine eyes.
	Will all great Neptune's ocean wash this blood
	Clean from my hand? No, this my hand will rather
	The multitudinous seas in incarnadine,
	Making the green one red.

	[Re-enter LADY MACBETH]

LADY MACBETH	My hands are of your colour; but I shame
	To wear a heart so white.

	[Knocking within]

		    I hear a knocking
	At the south entry: retire we to our chamber;
	A little water clears us of this deed:
	How easy is it, then! Your constancy
	Hath left you unattended.

	[Knocking within]

		   Hark! more knocking.
	Get on your nightgown, lest occasion call us,
	And show us to be watchers. Be not lost
	So poorly in your thoughts.

MACBETH	To know my deed, 'twere best not know myself.

	[Knocking within]

	Wake Duncan with thy knocking! I would thou couldst!

	[Exeunt]



	MACBETH


ACT II



SCENE III	The same.


	[Knocking within. Enter a Porter]

Porter	Here's a knocking indeed! If a
	man were porter of hell-gate, he should have
	old turning the key.

	[Knocking within]
		Knock,
	knock, knock! Who's there, i' the name of
	Beelzebub? Here's a farmer, that hanged
	himself on the expectation of plenty: come in
	time; have napkins enow about you; here
	you'll sweat for't.

	[Knocking within]
	Knock,
	knock! Who's there, in the other devil's
	name? Faith, here's an equivocator, that could
	swear in both the scales against either scale;
	who committed treason enough for God's sake,
	yet could not equivocate to heaven: O, come
	in, equivocator.

	[Knocking within]
	Knock,
	knock, knock! Who's there? Faith, here's an
	English tailor come hither, for stealing out of
	a French hose: come in, tailor; here you may
	roast your goose.

	[Knocking within]
	Knock,
	knock; never at quiet! What are you? But
	this place is too cold for hell. I'll devil-porter
	it no further: I had thought to have let in
	some of all professions that go the primrose
	way to the everlasting bonfire.

	[Knocking within]

	Anon, anon! I pray you, remember the porter.

	[Opens the gate]

	[Enter MACDUFF and LENNOX]

MACDUFF	Was it so late, friend, ere you went to bed,
	That you do lie so late?

Porter	'Faith sir, we were carousing till the
	second cock: and drink, sir, is a great
	provoker of three things.

MACDUFF	What three things does drink especially provoke?

Porter	Marry, sir, nose-painting, sleep, and
	urine. Lechery, sir, it provokes, and unprovokes;
	it provokes the desire, but it takes
	away the performance: therefore, much drink
	may be said to be an equivocator with lechery:
	it makes him, and it mars him; it sets
	him on, and it takes him off; it persuades him,
	and disheartens him; makes him stand to, and
	not stand to; in conclusion, equivocates him
	in a sleep, and, giving him the lie, leaves him.

MACDUFF	I believe drink gave thee the lie last night.

Porter	That it did, sir, i' the very throat on
	me: but I requited him for his lie; and, I
	think, being too strong for him, though he took
	up my legs sometime, yet I made a shift to cast
	him.

MACDUFF	Is thy master stirring?

	[Enter MACBETH]

	Our knocking has awaked him; here he comes.

LENNOX	Good morrow, noble sir.

MACBETH	Good morrow, both.

MACDUFF	Is the king stirring, worthy thane?

MACBETH	Not yet.

MACDUFF	He did command me to call timely on him:
	I have almost slipp'd the hour.

MACBETH	I'll bring you to him.

MACDUFF	I know this is a joyful trouble to you;
	But yet 'tis one.

MACBETH	The labour we delight in physics pain.
	This is the door.

MACDUFF	                  I'll make so bold to call,
	For 'tis my limited service.

	[Exit]

LENNOX	Goes the king hence to-day?

MACBETH	He does: he did appoint so.

LENNOX	The night has been unruly: where we lay,
	Our chimneys were blown down; and, as they say,
	Lamentings heard i' the air; strange screams of death,
	And prophesying with accents terrible
	Of dire combustion and confused events
	New hatch'd to the woeful time: the obscure bird
	Clamour'd the livelong night: some say, the earth
	Was feverous and did shake.

MACBETH	'Twas a rough night.

LENNOX	My young remembrance cannot parallel
	A fellow to it.

	[Re-enter MACDUFF]

MACDUFF	O horror, horror, horror! Tongue nor heart
	Cannot conceive nor name thee!


MACBETH	|
	|	What's the matter.
LENNOX	|


MACDUFF	Confusion now hath made his masterpiece!
	Most sacrilegious murder hath broke ope
	The Lord's anointed temple, and stole thence
	The life o' the building!

MACBETH	What is 't you say? the life?

LENNOX	Mean you his majesty?

MACDUFF	Approach the chamber, and destroy your sight
	With a new Gorgon: do not bid me speak;
	See, and then speak yourselves.

	[Exeunt MACBETH and LENNOX]

		          Awake, awake!
	Ring the alarum-bell. Murder and treason!
	Banquo and Donalbain! Malcolm! awake!
	Shake off this downy sleep, death's counterfeit,
	And look on death itself! up, up, and see
	The great doom's image! Malcolm! Banquo!
	As from your graves rise up, and walk like sprites,
	To countenance this horror! Ring the bell.

	[Bell rings]

	[Enter LADY MACBETH]

LADY MACBETH	What's the business,
	That such a hideous trumpet calls to parley
	The sleepers of the house? speak, speak!

MACDUFF	O gentle lady,
	'Tis not for you to hear what I can speak:
	The repetition, in a woman's ear,
	Would murder as it fell.

	[Enter BANQUO]

		   O Banquo, Banquo,
	Our royal master 's murder'd!

LADY MACBETH	Woe, alas!
	What, in our house?

BANQUO	Too cruel any where.
	Dear Duff, I prithee, contradict thyself,
	And say it is not so.

	[Re-enter MACBETH and LENNOX, with ROSS]

MACBETH	Had I but died an hour before this chance,
	I had lived a blessed time; for, from this instant,
	There 's nothing serious in mortality:
	All is but toys: renown and grace is dead;
	The wine of life is drawn, and the mere lees
	Is left this vault to brag of.

	[Enter MALCOLM and DONALBAIN]

DONALBAIN	What is amiss?

MACBETH	                  You are, and do not know't:
	The spring, the head, the fountain of your blood
	Is stopp'd; the very source of it is stopp'd.

MACDUFF	Your royal father 's murder'd.

MALCOLM	O, by whom?

LENNOX	Those of his chamber, as it seem'd, had done 't:
	Their hands and faces were an badged with blood;
	So were their daggers, which unwiped we found
	Upon their pillows:
	They stared, and were distracted; no man's life
	Was to be trusted with them.

MACBETH	O, yet I do repent me of my fury,
	That I did kill them.

MACDUFF	Wherefore did you so?

MACBETH	Who can be wise, amazed, temperate and furious,
	Loyal and neutral, in a moment? No man:
	The expedition my violent love
	Outrun the pauser, reason. Here lay Duncan,
	His silver skin laced with his golden blood;
	And his gash'd stabs look'd like a breach in nature
	For ruin's wasteful entrance: there, the murderers,
	Steep'd in the colours of their trade, their daggers
	Unmannerly breech'd with gore: who could refrain,
	That had a heart to love, and in that heart
	Courage to make 's love known?

LADY MACBETH	Help me hence, ho!

MACDUFF	Look to the lady.

MALCOLM	[Aside to DONALBAIN]  Why do we hold our tongues,
	That most may claim this argument for ours?

DONALBAIN	[Aside to MALCOLM]  What should be spoken here,
	where our fate,
	Hid in an auger-hole, may rush, and seize us?
	Let 's away;
	Our tears are not yet brew'd.

MALCOLM	[Aside to DONALBAIN]        Nor our strong sorrow
	Upon the foot of motion.

BANQUO	Look to the lady:

	[LADY MACBETH is carried out]

	And when we have our naked frailties hid,
	That suffer in exposure, let us meet,
	And question this most bloody piece of work,
	To know it further. Fears and scruples shake us:
	In the great hand of God I stand; and thence
	Against the undivulged pretence I fight
	Of treasonous malice.

MACDUFF	And so do I.

ALL	So all.

MACBETH	Let's briefly put on manly readiness,
	And meet i' the hall together.

ALL	Well contented.

	[Exeunt all but Malcolm and Donalbain.

MALCOLM	What will you do? Let's not consort with them:
	To show an unfelt sorrow is an office
	Which the false man does easy. I'll to England.

DONALBAIN	To Ireland, I; our separated fortune
	Shall keep us both the safer: where we are,
	There's daggers in men's smiles: the near in blood,
	The nearer bloody.

MALCOLM	                  This murderous shaft that's shot
	Hath not yet lighted, and our safest way
	Is to avoid the aim. Therefore, to horse;
	And let us not be dainty of leave-taking,
	But shift away: there's warrant in that theft
	Which steals itself, when there's no mercy left.

	[Exeunt]




	MACBETH


ACT II



SCENE IV	Outside Macbeth's castle.


	[Enter ROSS and an old Man]

Old Man	Threescore and ten I can remember well:
	Within the volume of which time I have seen
	Hours dreadful and things strange; but this sore night
	Hath trifled former knowings.

ROSS	Ah, good father,
	Thou seest, the heavens, as troubled with man's act,
	Threaten his bloody stage: by the clock, 'tis day,
	And yet dark night strangles the travelling lamp:
	Is't night's predominance, or the day's shame,
	That darkness does the face of earth entomb,
	When living light should kiss it?

Old Man	'Tis unnatural,
	Even like the deed that's done. On Tuesday last,
	A falcon, towering in her pride of place,
	Was by a mousing owl hawk'd at and kill'd.

ROSS	And Duncan's horses--a thing most strange and certain--
	Beauteous and swift, the minions of their race,
	Turn'd wild in nature, broke their stalls, flung out,
	Contending 'gainst obedience, as they would make
	War with mankind.

Old Man	'Tis said they eat each other.

ROSS	They did so, to the amazement of mine eyes
	That look'd upon't. Here comes the good Macduff.

	[Enter MACDUFF]

	How goes the world, sir, now?

MACDUFF	Why, see you not?

ROSS	Is't known who did this more than bloody deed?

MACDUFF	Those that Macbeth hath slain.

ROSS	Alas, the day!
	What good could they pretend?

MACDUFF	They were suborn'd:
	Malcolm and Donalbain, the king's two sons,
	Are stol'n away and fled; which puts upon them
	Suspicion of the deed.

ROSS	'Gainst nature still!
	Thriftless ambition, that wilt ravin up
	Thine own life's means! Then 'tis most like
	The sovereignty will fall upon Macbeth.

MACDUFF	He is already named, and gone to Scone
	To be invested.

ROSS	                  Where is Duncan's body?

MACDUFF	Carried to Colmekill,
	The sacred storehouse of his predecessors,
	And guardian of their bones.

ROSS	Will you to Scone?

MACDUFF	No, cousin, I'll to Fife.

ROSS	Well, I will thither.

MACDUFF	Well, may you see things well done there: adieu!
	Lest our old robes sit easier than our new!

ROSS	Farewell, father.

Old Man	God's benison go with you; and with those
	That would make good of bad, and friends of foes!

	[Exeunt]




	MACBETH


ACT III



SCENE I	Forres. The palace.


	[Enter BANQUO]

BANQUO	Thou hast it now: king, Cawdor, Glamis, all,
	As the weird women promised, and, I fear,
	Thou play'dst most foully for't: yet it was said
	It should not stand in thy posterity,
	But that myself should be the root and father
	Of many kings. If there come truth from them--
	As upon thee, Macbeth, their speeches shine--
	Why, by the verities on thee made good,
	May they not be my oracles as well,
	And set me up in hope? But hush! no more.

	[Sennet sounded. Enter MACBETH, as king, LADY
	MACBETH, as queen, LENNOX, ROSS, Lords, Ladies, and
	Attendants]

MACBETH	Here's our chief guest.

LADY MACBETH	If he had been forgotten,
	It had been as a gap in our great feast,
	And all-thing unbecoming.

MACBETH	To-night we hold a solemn supper sir,
	And I'll request your presence.

BANQUO	Let your highness
	Command upon me; to the which my duties
	Are with a most indissoluble tie
	For ever knit.

MACBETH	                  Ride you this afternoon?

BANQUO	Ay, my good lord.

MACBETH	We should have else desired your good advice,
	Which still hath been both grave and prosperous,
	In this day's council; but we'll take to-morrow.
	Is't far you ride?

BANQUO	As far, my lord, as will fill up the time
	'Twixt this and supper: go not my horse the better,
	I must become a borrower of the night
	For a dark hour or twain.

MACBETH	Fail not our feast.

BANQUO	My lord, I will not.

MACBETH	We hear, our bloody cousins are bestow'd
	In England and in Ireland, not confessing
	Their cruel parricide, filling their hearers
	With strange invention: but of that to-morrow,
	When therewithal we shall have cause of state
	Craving us jointly. Hie you to horse: adieu,
	Till you return at night. Goes Fleance with you?

BANQUO	Ay, my good lord: our time does call upon 's.

MACBETH	I wish your horses swift and sure of foot;
	And so I do commend you to their backs. Farewell.

	[Exit BANQUO]

	Let every man be master of his time
	Till seven at night: to make society
	The sweeter welcome, we will keep ourself
	Till supper-time alone: while then, God be with you!

	[Exeunt all but MACBETH, and an attendant]

	Sirrah, a word with you: attend those men
	Our pleasure?

ATTENDANT	They are, my lord, without the palace gate.

MACBETH	Bring them before us.

	[Exit Attendant]

		To be thus is nothing;
	But to be safely thus.--Our fears in Banquo
	Stick deep; and in his royalty of nature
	Reigns that which would be fear'd: 'tis much he dares;
	And, to that dauntless temper of his mind,
	He hath a wisdom that doth guide his valour
	To act in safety. There is none but he
	Whose being I do fear: and, under him,
	My Genius is rebuked; as, it is said,
	Mark Antony's was by Caesar. He chid the sisters
	When first they put the name of king upon me,
	And bade them speak to him: then prophet-like
	They hail'd him father to a line of kings:
	Upon my head they placed a fruitless crown,
	And put a barren sceptre in my gripe,
	Thence to be wrench'd with an unlineal hand,
	No son of mine succeeding. If 't be so,
	For Banquo's issue have I filed my mind;
	For them the gracious Duncan have I murder'd;
	Put rancours in the vessel of my peace
	Only for them; and mine eternal jewel
	Given to the common enemy of man,
	To make them kings, the seed of Banquo kings!
	Rather than so, come fate into the list.
	And champion me to the utterance! Who's there!

	[Re-enter Attendant, with two Murderers]

	Now go to the door, and stay there till we call.

	[Exit Attendant]

	Was it not yesterday we spoke together?

First Murderer	It was, so please your highness.

MACBETH	Well then, now
	Have you consider'd of my speeches? Know
	That it was he in the times past which held you
	So under fortune, which you thought had been
	Our innocent self: this I made good to you
	In our last conference, pass'd in probation with you,
	How you were borne in hand, how cross'd,
	the instruments,
	Who wrought with them, and all things else that might
	To half a soul and to a notion crazed
	Say 'Thus did Banquo.'

First Murderer	You made it known to us.

MACBETH	I did so, and went further, which is now
	Our point of second meeting. Do you find
	Your patience so predominant in your nature
	That you can let this go? Are you so gospell'd
	To pray for this good man and for his issue,
	Whose heavy hand hath bow'd you to the grave
	And beggar'd yours for ever?

First Murderer	We are men, my liege.

MACBETH	Ay, in the catalogue ye go for men;
	As hounds and greyhounds, mongrels, spaniels, curs,
	Shoughs, water-rugs and demi-wolves, are clept
	All by the name of dogs: the valued file
	Distinguishes the swift, the slow, the subtle,
	The housekeeper, the hunter, every one
	According to the gift which bounteous nature
	Hath in him closed; whereby he does receive
	Particular addition. from the bill
	That writes them all alike: and so of men.
	Now, if you have a station in the file,
	Not i' the worst rank of manhood, say 't;
	And I will put that business in your bosoms,
	Whose execution takes your enemy off,
	Grapples you to the heart and love of us,
	Who wear our health but sickly in his life,
	Which in his death were perfect.

Second Murderer	I am one, my liege,
	Whom the vile blows and buffets of the world
	Have so incensed that I am reckless what
	I do to spite the world.

First Murderer	And I another
	So weary with disasters, tugg'd with fortune,
	That I would set my lie on any chance,
	To mend it, or be rid on't.

MACBETH	Both of you
	Know Banquo was your enemy.

Both Murderers	True, my lord.

MACBETH	So is he mine; and in such bloody distance,
	That every minute of his being thrusts
	Against my near'st of life: and though I could
	With barefaced power sweep him from my sight
	And bid my will avouch it, yet I must not,
	For certain friends that are both his and mine,
	Whose loves I may not drop, but wail his fall
	Who I myself struck down; and thence it is,
	That I to your assistance do make love,
	Masking the business from the common eye
	For sundry weighty reasons.

Second Murderer	We shall, my lord,
	Perform what you command us.

First Murderer	Though our lives--

MACBETH	Your spirits shine through you. Within this hour at most
	I will advise you where to plant yourselves;
	Acquaint you with the perfect spy o' the time,
	The moment on't; for't must be done to-night,
	And something from the palace; always thought
	That I require a clearness: and with him--
	To leave no rubs nor botches in the work--
	Fleance his son, that keeps him company,
	Whose absence is no less material to me
	Than is his father's, must embrace the fate
	Of that dark hour. Resolve yourselves apart:
	I'll come to you anon.

Both Murderers	We are resolved, my lord.

MACBETH	I'll call upon you straight: abide within.

	[Exeunt Murderers]

	It is concluded. Banquo, thy soul's flight,
	If it find heaven, must find it out to-night.

	[Exit]




	MACBETH


ACT III



SCENE II	The palace.


	[Enter LADY MACBETH and a Servant]

LADY MACBETH	Is Banquo gone from court?

Servant	Ay, madam, but returns again to-night.

LADY MACBETH	Say to the king, I would attend his leisure
	For a few words.

Servant	                  Madam, I will.

	[Exit]

LADY MACBETH	Nought's had, all's spent,
	Where our desire is got without content:
	'Tis safer to be that which we destroy
	Than by destruction dwell in doubtful joy.

	[Enter MACBETH]

	How now, my lord! why do you keep alone,
	Of sorriest fancies your companions making,
	Using those thoughts which should indeed have died
	With them they think on? Things without all remedy
	Should be without regard: what's done is done.

MACBETH	We have scotch'd the snake, not kill'd it:
	She'll close and be herself, whilst our poor malice
	Remains in danger of her former tooth.
	But let the frame of things disjoint, both the
	worlds suffer,
	Ere we will eat our meal in fear and sleep
	In the affliction of these terrible dreams
	That shake us nightly: better be with the dead,
	Whom we, to gain our peace, have sent to peace,
	Than on the torture of the mind to lie
	In restless ecstasy. Duncan is in his grave;
	After life's fitful fever he sleeps well;
	Treason has done his worst: nor steel, nor poison,
	Malice domestic, foreign levy, nothing,
	Can touch him further.

LADY MACBETH	Come on;
	Gentle my lord, sleek o'er your rugged looks;
	Be bright and jovial among your guests to-night.

MACBETH	So shall I, love; and so, I pray, be you:
	Let your remembrance apply to Banquo;
	Present him eminence, both with eye and tongue:
	Unsafe the while, that we
	Must lave our honours in these flattering streams,
	And make our faces vizards to our hearts,
	Disguising what they are.

LADY MACBETH	You must leave this.

MACBETH	O, full of scorpions is my mind, dear wife!
	Thou know'st that Banquo, and his Fleance, lives.

LADY MACBETH	But in them nature's copy's not eterne.

MACBETH	There's comfort yet; they are assailable;
	Then be thou jocund: ere the bat hath flown
	His cloister'd flight, ere to black Hecate's summons
	The shard-borne beetle with his drowsy hums
	Hath rung night's yawning peal, there shall be done
	A deed of dreadful note.

LADY MACBETH	What's to be done?

MACBETH	Be innocent of the knowledge, dearest chuck,
	Till thou applaud the deed. Come, seeling night,
	Scarf up the tender eye of pitiful day;
	And with thy bloody and invisible hand
	Cancel and tear to pieces that great bond
	Which keeps me pale! Light thickens; and the crow
	Makes wing to the rooky wood:
	Good things of day begin to droop and drowse;
	While night's black agents to their preys do rouse.
	Thou marvell'st at my words: but hold thee still;
	Things bad begun make strong themselves by ill.
	So, prithee, go with me.

	[Exeunt]




	MACBETH


ACT III



SCENE III	A park near the palace.


	[Enter three Murderers]

First Murderer	But who did bid thee join with us?

Third Murderer	Macbeth.

Second Murderer	He needs not our mistrust, since he delivers
	Our offices and what we have to do
	To the direction just.

First Murderer	Then stand with us.
	The west yet glimmers with some streaks of day:
	Now spurs the lated traveller apace
	To gain the timely inn; and near approaches
	The subject of our watch.

Third Murderer	Hark! I hear horses.

BANQUO	[Within]  Give us a light there, ho!

Second Murderer	Then 'tis he: the rest
	That are within the note of expectation
	Already are i' the court.

First Murderer	His horses go about.

Third Murderer	Almost a mile: but he does usually,
	So all men do, from hence to the palace gate
	Make it their walk.

Second Murderer	A light, a light!

	[Enter BANQUO, and FLEANCE with a torch]

Third Murderer	'Tis he.

First Murderer	Stand to't.

BANQUO	It will be rain to-night.

First Murderer	Let it come down.

	[They set upon BANQUO]

BANQUO	O, treachery! Fly, good Fleance, fly, fly, fly!
	Thou mayst revenge. O slave!

	[Dies. FLEANCE escapes]

Third Murderer	Who did strike out the light?

First Murderer	Wast not the way?

Third Murderer	There's but one down; the son is fled.

Second Murderer	We have lost
	Best half of our affair.

First Murderer	Well, let's away, and say how much is done.

	[Exeunt]




	MACBETH


ACT III



SCENE IV	The same. Hall in the palace.


	[A banquet prepared. Enter MACBETH, LADY MACBETH,
	ROSS, LENNOX, Lords, and Attendants]

MACBETH	You know your own degrees; sit down: at first
	And last the hearty welcome.
Lords	Thanks to your majesty.

MACBETH	Ourself will mingle with society,
	And play the humble host.
	Our hostess keeps her state, but in best time
	We will require her welcome.

LADY MACBETH	Pronounce it for me, sir, to all our friends;
	For my heart speaks they are welcome.

	[First Murderer appears at the door]

MACBETH	See, they encounter thee with their hearts' thanks.
	Both sides are even: here I'll sit i' the midst:
	Be large in mirth; anon we'll drink a measure
	The table round.

	[Approaching the door]

	There's blood on thy face.

First Murderer	'Tis Banquo's then.

MACBETH	'Tis better thee without than he within.
	Is he dispatch'd?

First Murderer	My lord, his throat is cut; that I did for him.

MACBETH	Thou art the best o' the cut-throats: yet he's good
	That did the like for Fleance: if thou didst it,
	Thou art the nonpareil.

First Murderer	Most royal sir,
	Fleance is 'scaped.

MACBETH	Then comes my fit again: I had else been perfect,
	Whole as the marble, founded as the rock,
	As broad and general as the casing air:
	But now I am cabin'd, cribb'd, confined, bound in
	To saucy doubts and fears. But Banquo's safe?

First Murderer	Ay, my good lord: safe in a ditch he bides,
	With twenty trenched gashes on his head;
	The least a death to nature.

MACBETH	Thanks for that:
	There the grown serpent lies; the worm that's fled
	Hath nature that in time will venom breed,
	No teeth for the present. Get thee gone: to-morrow
	We'll hear, ourselves, again.

	[Exit Murderer]

LADY MACBETH	My royal lord,
	You do not give the cheer: the feast is sold
	That is not often vouch'd, while 'tis a-making,
	'Tis given with welcome: to feed were best at home;
	From thence the sauce to meat is ceremony;
	Meeting were bare without it.

MACBETH	Sweet remembrancer!
	Now, good digestion wait on appetite,
	And health on both!

LENNOX	May't please your highness sit.

	[The GHOST OF BANQUO enters, and sits in
	MACBETH's place]

MACBETH	Here had we now our country's honour roof'd,
	Were the graced person of our Banquo present;
	Who may I rather challenge for unkindness
	Than pity for mischance!

ROSS	His absence, sir,
	Lays blame upon his promise. Please't your highness
	To grace us with your royal company.

MACBETH	The table's full.

LENNOX	                  Here is a place reserved, sir.

MACBETH	Where?

LENNOX	Here, my good lord. What is't that moves your highness?

MACBETH	Which of you have done this?

Lords	What, my good lord?

MACBETH	Thou canst not say I did it: never shake
	Thy gory locks at me.

ROSS	Gentlemen, rise: his highness is not well.

LADY MACBETH	Sit, worthy friends: my lord is often thus,
	And hath been from his youth: pray you, keep seat;
	The fit is momentary; upon a thought
	He will again be well: if much you note him,
	You shall offend him and extend his passion:
	Feed, and regard him not. Are you a man?

MACBETH	Ay, and a bold one, that dare look on that
	Which might appal the devil.

LADY MACBETH	O proper stuff!
	This is the very painting of your fear:
	This is the air-drawn dagger which, you said,
	Led you to Duncan. O, these flaws and starts,
	Impostors to true fear, would well become
	A woman's story at a winter's fire,
	Authorized by her grandam. Shame itself!
	Why do you make such faces? When all's done,
	You look but on a stool.

MACBETH	Prithee, see there! behold! look! lo!
	how say you?
	Why, what care I? If thou canst nod, speak too.
	If charnel-houses and our graves must send
	Those that we bury back, our monuments
	Shall be the maws of kites.

	[GHOST OF BANQUO vanishes]

LADY MACBETH	What, quite unmann'd in folly?

MACBETH	If I stand here, I saw him.

LADY MACBETH	Fie, for shame!

MACBETH	Blood hath been shed ere now, i' the olden time,
	Ere human statute purged the gentle weal;
	Ay, and since too, murders have been perform'd
	Too terrible for the ear: the times have been,
	That, when the brains were out, the man would die,
	And there an end; but now they rise again,
	With twenty mortal murders on their crowns,
	And push us from our stools: this is more strange
	Than such a murder is.

LADY MACBETH	My worthy lord,
	Your noble friends do lack you.

MACBETH	I do forget.
	Do not muse at me, my most worthy friends,
	I have a strange infirmity, which is nothing
	To those that know me. Come, love and health to all;
	Then I'll sit down. Give me some wine; fill full.
	I drink to the general joy o' the whole table,
	And to our dear friend Banquo, whom we miss;
	Would he were here! to all, and him, we thirst,
	And all to all.

Lords	                  Our duties, and the pledge.

	[Re-enter GHOST OF BANQUO]

MACBETH	Avaunt! and quit my sight! let the earth hide thee!
	Thy bones are marrowless, thy blood is cold;
	Thou hast no speculation in those eyes
	Which thou dost glare with!

LADY MACBETH	Think of this, good peers,
	But as a thing of custom: 'tis no other;
	Only it spoils the pleasure of the time.

MACBETH	What man dare, I dare:
	Approach thou like the rugged Russian bear,
	The arm'd rhinoceros, or the Hyrcan tiger;
	Take any shape but that, and my firm nerves
	Shall never tremble: or be alive again,
	And dare me to the desert with thy sword;
	If trembling I inhabit then, protest me
	The baby of a girl. Hence, horrible shadow!
	Unreal mockery, hence!

	[GHOST OF BANQUO vanishes]

		 Why, so: being gone,
	I am a man again. Pray you, sit still.

LADY MACBETH	You have displaced the mirth, broke the good meeting,
	With most admired disorder.

MACBETH	Can such things be,
	And overcome us like a summer's cloud,
	Without our special wonder? You make me strange
	Even to the disposition that I owe,
	When now I think you can behold such sights,
	And keep the natural ruby of your cheeks,
	When mine is blanched with fear.

ROSS	What sights, my lord?

LADY MACBETH	I pray you, speak not; he grows worse and worse;
	Question enrages him. At once, good night:
	Stand not upon the order of your going,
	But go at once.

LENNOX	                  Good night; and better health
	Attend his majesty!

LADY MACBETH	A kind good night to all!

	[Exeunt all but MACBETH and LADY MACBETH]

MACBETH	It will have blood; they say, blood will have blood:
	Stones have been known to move and trees to speak;
	Augurs and understood relations have
	By magot-pies and choughs and rooks brought forth
	The secret'st man of blood. What is the night?

LADY MACBETH	Almost at odds with morning, which is which.

MACBETH	How say'st thou, that Macduff denies his person
	At our great bidding?

LADY MACBETH	Did you send to him, sir?

MACBETH	I hear it by the way; but I will send:
	There's not a one of them but in his house
	I keep a servant fee'd. I will to-morrow,
	And betimes I will, to the weird sisters:
	More shall they speak; for now I am bent to know,
	By the worst means, the worst. For mine own good,
	All causes shall give way: I am in blood
	Stepp'd in so far that, should I wade no more,
	Returning were as tedious as go o'er:
	Strange things I have in head, that will to hand;
	Which must be acted ere they may be scann'd.

LADY MACBETH	You lack the season of all natures, sleep.

MACBETH	Come, we'll to sleep. My strange and self-abuse
	Is the initiate fear that wants hard use:
	We are yet but young in deed.

	[Exeunt]




	MACBETH


ACT III



SCENE V	A Heath.


	[Thunder. Enter the three Witches meeting HECATE]

First Witch	Why, how now, Hecate! you look angerly.

HECATE	Have I not reason, beldams as you are,
	Saucy and overbold? How did you dare
	To trade and traffic with Macbeth
	In riddles and affairs of death;
	And I, the mistress of your charms,
	The close contriver of all harms,
	Was never call'd to bear my part,
	Or show the glory of our art?
	And, which is worse, all you have done
	Hath been but for a wayward son,
	Spiteful and wrathful, who, as others do,
	Loves for his own ends, not for you.
	But make amends now: get you gone,
	And at the pit of Acheron
	Meet me i' the morning: thither he
	Will come to know his destiny:
	Your vessels and your spells provide,
	Your charms and every thing beside.
	I am for the air; this night I'll spend
	Unto a dismal and a fatal end:
	Great business must be wrought ere noon:
	Upon the corner of the moon
	There hangs a vaporous drop profound;
	I'll catch it ere it come to ground:
	And that distill'd by magic sleights
	Shall raise such artificial sprites
	As by the strength of their illusion
	Shall draw him on to his confusion:
	He shall spurn fate, scorn death, and bear
	He hopes 'bove wisdom, grace and fear:
	And you all know, security
	Is mortals' chiefest enemy.

	[Music and a song within: 'Come away, come
	away,' &c]

	Hark! I am call'd; my little spirit, see,
	Sits in a foggy cloud, and stays for me.

	[Exit]

First Witch	Come, let's make haste; she'll soon be back again.

	[Exeunt]




	MACBETH


ACT III



SCENE VI	Forres. The palace.


	[Enter LENNOX and another Lord]

LENNOX	My former speeches have but hit your thoughts,
	Which can interpret further: only, I say,
	Things have been strangely borne. The
	gracious Duncan
	Was pitied of Macbeth: marry, he was dead:
	And the right-valiant Banquo walk'd too late;
	Whom, you may say, if't please you, Fleance kill'd,
	For Fleance fled: men must not walk too late.
	Who cannot want the thought how monstrous
	It was for Malcolm and for Donalbain
	To kill their gracious father? damned fact!
	How it did grieve Macbeth! did he not straight
	In pious rage the two delinquents tear,
	That were the slaves of drink and thralls of sleep?
	Was not that nobly done? Ay, and wisely too;
	For 'twould have anger'd any heart alive
	To hear the men deny't. So that, I say,
	He has borne all things well: and I do think
	That had he Duncan's sons under his key--
	As, an't please heaven, he shall not--they
	should find
	What 'twere to kill a father; so should Fleance.
	But, peace! for from broad words and 'cause he fail'd
	His presence at the tyrant's feast, I hear
	Macduff lives in disgrace: sir, can you tell
	Where he bestows himself?

Lord	The son of Duncan,
	From whom this tyrant holds the due of birth
	Lives in the English court, and is received
	Of the most pious Edward with such grace
	That the malevolence of fortune nothing
	Takes from his high respect: thither Macduff
	Is gone to pray the holy king, upon his aid
	To wake Northumberland and warlike Siward:
	That, by the help of these--with Him above
	To ratify the work--we may again
	Give to our tables meat, sleep to our nights,
	Free from our feasts and banquets bloody knives,
	Do faithful homage and receive free honours:
	All which we pine for now: and this report
	Hath so exasperate the king that he
	Prepares for some attempt of war.

LENNOX	Sent he to Macduff?

Lord	He did: and with an absolute 'Sir, not I,'
	The cloudy messenger turns me his back,
	And hums, as who should say 'You'll rue the time
	That clogs me with this answer.'

LENNOX	And that well might
	Advise him to a caution, to hold what distance
	His wisdom can provide. Some holy angel
	Fly to the court of England and unfold
	His message ere he come, that a swift blessing
	May soon return to this our suffering country
	Under a hand accursed!

Lord	I'll send my prayers with him.

	[Exeunt]




	MACBETH


ACT IV



SCENE I	A cavern. In the middle, a boiling cauldron.


	[Thunder. Enter the three Witches]


First Witch	Thrice the brinded cat hath mew'd.

Second Witch	Thrice and once the hedge-pig whined.

Third Witch	Harpier cries 'Tis time, 'tis time.

First Witch	Round about the cauldron go;
	In the poison'd entrails throw.
	Toad, that under cold stone
	Days and nights has thirty-one
	Swelter'd venom sleeping got,
	Boil thou first i' the charmed pot.

ALL	Double, double toil and trouble;
	Fire burn, and cauldron bubble.

Second Witch	Fillet of a fenny snake,
	In the cauldron boil and bake;
	Eye of newt and toe of frog,
	Wool of bat and tongue of dog,
	Adder's fork and blind-worm's sting,
	Lizard's leg and owlet's wing,
	For a charm of powerful trouble,
	Like a hell-broth boil and bubble.

ALL	Double, double toil and trouble;
	Fire burn and cauldron bubble.

Third Witch	Scale of dragon, tooth of wolf,
	Witches' mummy, maw and gulf
	Of the ravin'd salt-sea shark,
	Root of hemlock digg'd i' the dark,
	Liver of blaspheming Jew,
	Gall of goat, and slips of yew
	Silver'd in the moon's eclipse,
	Nose of Turk and Tartar's lips,
	Finger of birth-strangled babe
	Ditch-deliver'd by a drab,
	Make the gruel thick and slab:
	Add thereto a tiger's chaudron,
	For the ingredients of our cauldron.

ALL	Double, double toil and trouble;
	Fire burn and cauldron bubble.

Second Witch	Cool it with a baboon's blood,
	Then the charm is firm and good.

	[Enter HECATE to the other three Witches]

HECATE	O well done! I commend your pains;
	And every one shall share i' the gains;
	And now about the cauldron sing,
	Live elves and fairies in a ring,
	Enchanting all that you put in.

	[Music and a song: 'Black spirits,' &c]

	[HECATE retires]

Second Witch	By the pricking of my thumbs,
	Something wicked this way comes.
	Open, locks,
	Whoever knocks!

	[Enter MACBETH]

MACBETH	How now, you secret, black, and midnight hags!
	What is't you do?

ALL	                  A deed without a name.

MACBETH	I conjure you, by that which you profess,
	Howe'er you come to know it, answer me:
	Though you untie the winds and let them fight
	Against the churches; though the yesty waves
	Confound and swallow navigation up;
	Though bladed corn be lodged and trees blown down;
	Though castles topple on their warders' heads;
	Though palaces and pyramids do slope
	Their heads to their foundations; though the treasure
	Of nature's germens tumble all together,
	Even till destruction sicken; answer me
	To what I ask you.

First Witch	                  Speak.

Second Witch	Demand.

Third Witch	We'll answer.

First Witch	Say, if thou'dst rather hear it from our mouths,
	Or from our masters?

MACBETH	Call 'em; let me see 'em.

First Witch	Pour in sow's blood, that hath eaten
	Her nine farrow; grease that's sweaten
	From the murderer's gibbet throw
	Into the flame.

ALL	                  Come, high or low;
	Thyself and office deftly show!

	[Thunder. First Apparition: an armed Head]

MACBETH	Tell me, thou unknown power,--

First Witch	He knows thy thought:
	Hear his speech, but say thou nought.

First Apparition	Macbeth! Macbeth! Macbeth! beware Macduff;
	Beware the thane of Fife. Dismiss me. Enough.

	[Descends]

MACBETH	Whate'er thou art, for thy good caution, thanks;
	Thou hast harp'd my fear aright: but one
	word more,--

First Witch	He will not be commanded: here's another,
	More potent than the first.

	[Thunder. Second Apparition: A bloody Child]

Second Apparition	Macbeth! Macbeth! Macbeth!

MACBETH	Had I three ears, I'ld hear thee.

Second Apparition	Be bloody, bold, and resolute; laugh to scorn
	The power of man, for none of woman born
	Shall harm Macbeth.

	[Descends]

MACBETH	Then live, Macduff: what need I fear of thee?
	But yet I'll make assurance double sure,
	And take a bond of fate: thou shalt not live;
	That I may tell pale-hearted fear it lies,
	And sleep in spite of thunder.

	[Thunder. Third Apparition: a Child crowned,
	with a tree in his hand]

		         What is this
	That rises like the issue of a king,
	And wears upon his baby-brow the round
	And top of sovereignty?

ALL	Listen, but speak not to't.

Third Apparition	Be lion-mettled, proud; and take no care
	Who chafes, who frets, or where conspirers are:
	Macbeth shall never vanquish'd be until
	Great Birnam wood to high Dunsinane hill
	Shall come against him.

	[Descends]

MACBETH	That will never be
	Who can impress the forest, bid the tree
	Unfix his earth-bound root? Sweet bodements! good!
	Rebellion's head, rise never till the wood
	Of Birnam rise, and our high-placed Macbeth
	Shall live the lease of nature, pay his breath
	To time and mortal custom. Yet my heart
	Throbs to know one thing: tell me, if your art
	Can tell so much: shall Banquo's issue ever
	Reign in this kingdom?

ALL	Seek to know no more.

MACBETH	I will be satisfied: deny me this,
	And an eternal curse fall on you! Let me know.
	Why sinks that cauldron? and what noise is this?

	[Hautboys]

First Witch	Show!

Second Witch	Show!

Third Witch	Show!

ALL	Show his eyes, and grieve his heart;
	Come like shadows, so depart!

	[A show of Eight Kings, the last with a glass in
	his hand; GHOST OF BANQUO following]

MACBETH	Thou art too like the spirit of Banquo: down!
	Thy crown does sear mine eye-balls. And thy hair,
	Thou other gold-bound brow, is like the first.
	A third is like the former. Filthy hags!
	Why do you show me this? A fourth! Start, eyes!
	What, will the line stretch out to the crack of doom?
	Another yet! A seventh! I'll see no more:
	And yet the eighth appears, who bears a glass
	Which shows me many more; and some I see
	That two-fold balls and treble scepters carry:
	Horrible sight! Now, I see, 'tis true;
	For the blood-bolter'd Banquo smiles upon me,
	And points at them for his.

	[Apparitions vanish]

		      What, is this so?

First Witch	Ay, sir, all this is so: but why
	Stands Macbeth thus amazedly?
	Come, sisters, cheer we up his sprites,
	And show the best of our delights:
	I'll charm the air to give a sound,
	While you perform your antic round:
	That this great king may kindly say,
	Our duties did his welcome pay.

	[Music. The witches dance and then vanish,
	with HECATE]

MACBETH	Where are they? Gone? Let this pernicious hour
	Stand aye accursed in the calendar!
	Come in, without there!

	[Enter LENNOX]

LENNOX	What's your grace's will?

MACBETH	Saw you the weird sisters?

LENNOX	No, my lord.

MACBETH	Came they not by you?

LENNOX	No, indeed, my lord.

MACBETH	Infected be the air whereon they ride;
	And damn'd all those that trust them! I did hear
	The galloping of horse: who was't came by?

LENNOX	'Tis two or three, my lord, that bring you word
	Macduff is fled to England.

MACBETH	Fled to England!

LENNOX	Ay, my good lord.

MACBETH	Time, thou anticipatest my dread exploits:
	The flighty purpose never is o'ertook
	Unless the deed go with it; from this moment
	The very firstlings of my heart shall be
	The firstlings of my hand. And even now,
	To crown my thoughts with acts, be it thought and done:
	The castle of Macduff I will surprise;
	Seize upon Fife; give to the edge o' the sword
	His wife, his babes, and all unfortunate souls
	That trace him in his line. No boasting like a fool;
	This deed I'll do before this purpose cool.
	But no more sights!--Where are these gentlemen?
	Come, bring me where they are.

	[Exeunt]




	MACBETH


ACT IV



SCENE II	Fife. Macduff's castle.


	[Enter LADY MACDUFF, her Son, and ROSS]

LADY MACDUFF	What had he done, to make him fly the land?

ROSS	You must have patience, madam.

LADY MACDUFF	He had none:
	His flight was madness: when our actions do not,
	Our fears do make us traitors.

ROSS	You know not
	Whether it was his wisdom or his fear.

LADY MACDUFF	Wisdom! to leave his wife, to leave his babes,
	His mansion and his titles in a place
	From whence himself does fly? He loves us not;
	He wants the natural touch: for the poor wren,
	The most diminutive of birds, will fight,
	Her young ones in her nest, against the owl.
	All is the fear and nothing is the love;
	As little is the wisdom, where the flight
	So runs against all reason.

ROSS	My dearest coz,
	I pray you, school yourself: but for your husband,
	He is noble, wise, judicious, and best knows
	The fits o' the season. I dare not speak
	much further;
	But cruel are the times, when we are traitors
	And do not know ourselves, when we hold rumour
	From what we fear, yet know not what we fear,
	But float upon a wild and violent sea
	Each way and move. I take my leave of you:
	Shall not be long but I'll be here again:
	Things at the worst will cease, or else climb upward
	To what they were before. My pretty cousin,
	Blessing upon you!

LADY MACDUFF	Father'd he is, and yet he's fatherless.

ROSS	I am so much a fool, should I stay longer,
	It would be my disgrace and your discomfort:
	I take my leave at once.

	[Exit]

LADY MACDUFF	Sirrah, your father's dead;
	And what will you do now? How will you live?

Son	As birds do, mother.

LADY MACDUFF	What, with worms and flies?

Son	With what I get, I mean; and so do they.

LADY MACDUFF	Poor bird! thou'ldst never fear the net nor lime,
	The pitfall nor the gin.

Son	Why should I, mother? Poor birds they are not set for.
	My father is not dead, for all your saying.

LADY MACDUFF	Yes, he is dead; how wilt thou do for a father?

Son	Nay, how will you do for a husband?

LADY MACDUFF	Why, I can buy me twenty at any market.

Son	Then you'll buy 'em to sell again.

LADY MACDUFF	Thou speak'st with all thy wit: and yet, i' faith,
	With wit enough for thee.

Son	Was my father a traitor, mother?

LADY MACDUFF	Ay, that he was.

Son	What is a traitor?

LADY MACDUFF	Why, one that swears and lies.

Son	And be all traitors that do so?

LADY MACDUFF	Every one that does so is a traitor, and must be hanged.

Son	And must they all be hanged that swear and lie?

LADY MACDUFF	Every one.

Son	Who must hang them?

LADY MACDUFF	Why, the honest men.

Son	Then the liars and swearers are fools,
	for there are liars and swearers enow to beat
	the honest men and hang up them.

LADY MACDUFF	Now, God help thee, poor monkey!
	But how wilt thou do for a father?

Son	If he were dead, you'ld weep for
	him: if you would not, it were a good sign
	that I should quickly have a new father.

LADY MACDUFF	Poor prattler, how thou talk'st!

	[Enter a Messenger]

Messenger	Bless you, fair dame! I am not to you known,
	Though in your state of honour I am perfect.
	I doubt some danger does approach you nearly:
	If you will take a homely man's advice,
	Be not found here; hence, with your little ones.
	To fright you thus, methinks, I am too savage;
	To do worse to you were fell cruelty,
	Which is too nigh your person. Heaven preserve you!
	I dare abide no longer.

	[Exit]

LADY MACDUFF	Whither should I fly?
	I have done no harm. But I remember now
	I am in this earthly world; where to do harm
	Is often laudable, to do good sometime
	Accounted dangerous folly: why then, alas,
	Do I put up that womanly defence,
	To say I have done no harm?

	[Enter Murderers]

		      What are these faces?

First Murderer	Where is your husband?

LADY MACDUFF	I hope, in no place so unsanctified
	Where such as thou mayst find him.

First Murderer	He's a traitor.

Son	Thou liest, thou shag-hair'd villain!

First Murderer	What, you egg!

	[Stabbing him]

	Young fry of treachery!

Son	He has kill'd me, mother:
	Run away, I pray you!

	[Dies]

	[Exit LADY MACDUFF, crying 'Murder!' Exeunt
	Murderers, following her]



	MACBETH


ACT IV



SCENE III	England. Before the King's palace.


	[Enter MALCOLM and MACDUFF]

MALCOLM	Let us seek out some desolate shade, and there
	Weep our sad bosoms empty.

MACDUFF	Let us rather
	Hold fast the mortal sword, and like good men
	Bestride our down-fall'n birthdom: each new morn
	New widows howl, new orphans cry, new sorrows
	Strike heaven on the face, that it resounds
	As if it felt with Scotland and yell'd out
	Like syllable of dolour.

MALCOLM	What I believe I'll wail,
	What know believe, and what I can redress,
	As I shall find the time to friend, I will.
	What you have spoke, it may be so perchance.
	This tyrant, whose sole name blisters our tongues,
	Was once thought honest: you have loved him well.
	He hath not touch'd you yet. I am young;
	but something
	You may deserve of him through me, and wisdom
	To offer up a weak poor innocent lamb
	To appease an angry god.

MACDUFF	I am not treacherous.

MALCOLM	But Macbeth is.
	A good and virtuous nature may recoil
	In an imperial charge. But I shall crave
	your pardon;
	That which you are my thoughts cannot transpose:
	Angels are bright still, though the brightest fell;
	Though all things foul would wear the brows of grace,
	Yet grace must still look so.

MACDUFF	I have lost my hopes.

MALCOLM	Perchance even there where I did find my doubts.
	Why in that rawness left you wife and child,
	Those precious motives, those strong knots of love,
	Without leave-taking? I pray you,
	Let not my jealousies be your dishonours,
	But mine own safeties. You may be rightly just,
	Whatever I shall think.

MACDUFF	Bleed, bleed, poor country!
	Great tyranny! lay thou thy basis sure,
	For goodness dare not cheque thee: wear thou
	thy wrongs;
	The title is affeer'd! Fare thee well, lord:
	I would not be the villain that thou think'st
	For the whole space that's in the tyrant's grasp,
	And the rich East to boot.

MALCOLM	Be not offended:
	I speak not as in absolute fear of you.
	I think our country sinks beneath the yoke;
	It weeps, it bleeds; and each new day a gash
	Is added to her wounds: I think withal
	There would be hands uplifted in my right;
	And here from gracious England have I offer
	Of goodly thousands: but, for all this,
	When I shall tread upon the tyrant's head,
	Or wear it on my sword, yet my poor country
	Shall have more vices than it had before,
	More suffer and more sundry ways than ever,
	By him that shall succeed.

MACDUFF	What should he be?

MALCOLM	It is myself I mean: in whom I know
	All the particulars of vice so grafted
	That, when they shall be open'd, black Macbeth
	Will seem as pure as snow, and the poor state
	Esteem him as a lamb, being compared
	With my confineless harms.

MACDUFF	Not in the legions
	Of horrid hell can come a devil more damn'd
	In evils to top Macbeth.

MALCOLM	I grant him bloody,
	Luxurious, avaricious, false, deceitful,
	Sudden, malicious, smacking of every sin
	That has a name: but there's no bottom, none,
	In my voluptuousness: your wives, your daughters,
	Your matrons and your maids, could not fill up
	The cistern of my lust, and my desire
	All continent impediments would o'erbear
	That did oppose my will: better Macbeth
	Than such an one to reign.

MACDUFF	Boundless intemperance
	In nature is a tyranny; it hath been
	The untimely emptying of the happy throne
	And fall of many kings. But fear not yet
	To take upon you what is yours: you may
	Convey your pleasures in a spacious plenty,
	And yet seem cold, the time you may so hoodwink.
	We have willing dames enough: there cannot be
	That vulture in you, to devour so many
	As will to greatness dedicate themselves,
	Finding it so inclined.

MALCOLM	With this there grows
	In my most ill-composed affection such
	A stanchless avarice that, were I king,
	I should cut off the nobles for their lands,
	Desire his jewels and this other's house:
	And my more-having would be as a sauce
	To make me hunger more; that I should forge
	Quarrels unjust against the good and loyal,
	Destroying them for wealth.

MACDUFF	This avarice
	Sticks deeper, grows with more pernicious root
	Than summer-seeming lust, and it hath been
	The sword of our slain kings: yet do not fear;
	Scotland hath foisons to fill up your will.
	Of your mere own: all these are portable,
	With other graces weigh'd.

MALCOLM	But I have none: the king-becoming graces,
	As justice, verity, temperance, stableness,
	Bounty, perseverance, mercy, lowliness,
	Devotion, patience, courage, fortitude,
	I have no relish of them, but abound
	In the division of each several crime,
	Acting it many ways. Nay, had I power, I should
	Pour the sweet milk of concord into hell,
	Uproar the universal peace, confound
	All unity on earth.

MACDUFF	O Scotland, Scotland!

MALCOLM	If such a one be fit to govern, speak:
	I am as I have spoken.

MACDUFF	Fit to govern!
	No, not to live. O nation miserable,
	With an untitled tyrant bloody-scepter'd,
	When shalt thou see thy wholesome days again,
	Since that the truest issue of thy throne
	By his own interdiction stands accursed,
	And does blaspheme his breed? Thy royal father
	Was a most sainted king: the queen that bore thee,
	Oftener upon her knees than on her feet,
	Died every day she lived. Fare thee well!
	These evils thou repeat'st upon thyself
	Have banish'd me from Scotland. O my breast,
	Thy hope ends here!

MALCOLM	Macduff, this noble passion,
	Child of integrity, hath from my soul
	Wiped the black scruples, reconciled my thoughts
	To thy good truth and honour. Devilish Macbeth
	By many of these trains hath sought to win me
	Into his power, and modest wisdom plucks me
	From over-credulous haste: but God above
	Deal between thee and me! for even now
	I put myself to thy direction, and
	Unspeak mine own detraction, here abjure
	The taints and blames I laid upon myself,
	For strangers to my nature. I am yet
	Unknown to woman, never was forsworn,
	Scarcely have coveted what was mine own,
	At no time broke my faith, would not betray
	The devil to his fellow and delight
	No less in truth than life: my first false speaking
	Was this upon myself: what I am truly,
	Is thine and my poor country's to command:
	Whither indeed, before thy here-approach,
	Old Siward, with ten thousand warlike men,
	Already at a point, was setting forth.
	Now we'll together; and the chance of goodness
	Be like our warranted quarrel! Why are you silent?

MACDUFF	Such welcome and unwelcome things at once
	'Tis hard to reconcile.

	[Enter a Doctor]

MALCOLM	Well; more anon.--Comes the king forth, I pray you?

Doctor	Ay, sir; there are a crew of wretched souls
	That stay his cure: their malady convinces
	The great assay of art; but at his touch--
	Such sanctity hath heaven given his hand--
	They presently amend.

MALCOLM	I thank you, doctor.

	[Exit Doctor]

MACDUFF	What's the disease he means?

MALCOLM	'Tis call'd the evil:
	A most miraculous work in this good king;
	Which often, since my here-remain in England,
	I have seen him do. How he solicits heaven,
	Himself best knows: but strangely-visited people,
	All swoln and ulcerous, pitiful to the eye,
	The mere despair of surgery, he cures,
	Hanging a golden stamp about their necks,
	Put on with holy prayers: and 'tis spoken,
	To the succeeding royalty he leaves
	The healing benediction. With this strange virtue,
	He hath a heavenly gift of prophecy,
	And sundry blessings hang about his throne,
	That speak him full of grace.

	[Enter ROSS]

MACDUFF	See, who comes here?

MALCOLM	My countryman; but yet I know him not.

MACDUFF	My ever-gentle cousin, welcome hither.

MALCOLM	I know him now. Good God, betimes remove
	The means that makes us strangers!

ROSS	Sir, amen.

MACDUFF	Stands Scotland where it did?

ROSS	Alas, poor country!
	Almost afraid to know itself. It cannot
	Be call'd our mother, but our grave; where nothing,
	But who knows nothing, is once seen to smile;
	Where sighs and groans and shrieks that rend the air
	Are made, not mark'd; where violent sorrow seems
	A modern ecstasy; the dead man's knell
	Is there scarce ask'd for who; and good men's lives
	Expire before the flowers in their caps,
	Dying or ere they sicken.

MACDUFF	O, relation
	Too nice, and yet too true!

MALCOLM	What's the newest grief?

ROSS	That of an hour's age doth hiss the speaker:
	Each minute teems a new one.

MACDUFF	How does my wife?

ROSS	Why, well.

MACDUFF	         And all my children?

ROSS	Well too.

MACDUFF	The tyrant has not batter'd at their peace?

ROSS	No; they were well at peace when I did leave 'em.

MACDUFF	But not a niggard of your speech: how goes't?

ROSS	When I came hither to transport the tidings,
	Which I have heavily borne, there ran a rumour
	Of many worthy fellows that were out;
	Which was to my belief witness'd the rather,
	For that I saw the tyrant's power a-foot:
	Now is the time of help; your eye in Scotland
	Would create soldiers, make our women fight,
	To doff their dire distresses.

MALCOLM	Be't their comfort
	We are coming thither: gracious England hath
	Lent us good Siward and ten thousand men;
	An older and a better soldier none
	That Christendom gives out.

ROSS	Would I could answer
	This comfort with the like! But I have words
	That would be howl'd out in the desert air,
	Where hearing should not latch them.

MACDUFF	What concern they?
	The general cause? or is it a fee-grief
	Due to some single breast?

ROSS	No mind that's honest
	But in it shares some woe; though the main part
	Pertains to you alone.

MACDUFF	If it be mine,
	Keep it not from me, quickly let me have it.

ROSS	Let not your ears despise my tongue for ever,
	Which shall possess them with the heaviest sound
	That ever yet they heard.

MACDUFF	Hum! I guess at it.

ROSS	Your castle is surprised; your wife and babes
	Savagely slaughter'd: to relate the manner,
	Were, on the quarry of these murder'd deer,
	To add the death of you.

MALCOLM	Merciful heaven!
	What, man! ne'er pull your hat upon your brows;
	Give sorrow words: the grief that does not speak
	Whispers the o'er-fraught heart and bids it break.

MACDUFF	My children too?

ROSS	                  Wife, children, servants, all
	That could be found.

MACDUFF	And I must be from thence!
	My wife kill'd too?

ROSS	I have said.

MALCOLM	Be comforted:
	Let's make us medicines of our great revenge,
	To cure this deadly grief.

MACDUFF	He has no children. All my pretty ones?
	Did you say all? O hell-kite! All?
	What, all my pretty chickens and their dam
	At one fell swoop?

MALCOLM	Dispute it like a man.

MACDUFF	I shall do so;
	But I must also feel it as a man:
	I cannot but remember such things were,
	That were most precious to me. Did heaven look on,
	And would not take their part? Sinful Macduff,
	They were all struck for thee! naught that I am,
	Not for their own demerits, but for mine,
	Fell slaughter on their souls. Heaven rest them now!

MALCOLM	Be this the whetstone of your sword: let grief
	Convert to anger; blunt not the heart, enrage it.

MACDUFF	O, I could play the woman with mine eyes
	And braggart with my tongue! But, gentle heavens,
	Cut short all intermission; front to front
	Bring thou this fiend of Scotland and myself;
	Within my sword's length set him; if he 'scape,
	Heaven forgive him too!

MALCOLM	This tune goes manly.
	Come, go we to the king; our power is ready;
	Our lack is nothing but our leave; Macbeth
	Is ripe for shaking, and the powers above
	Put on their instruments. Receive what cheer you may:
	The night is long that never finds the day.

	[Exeunt]




	MACBETH


ACT V



SCENE I	Dunsinane. Ante-room in the castle.


	[Enter a Doctor of Physic and a Waiting-Gentlewoman]

Doctor	I have two nights watched with you, but can perceive
	no truth in your report. When was it she last walked?

Gentlewoman	Since his majesty went into the field, I have seen
	her rise from her bed, throw her night-gown upon
	her, unlock her closet, take forth paper, fold it,
	write upon't, read it, afterwards seal it, and again
	return to bed; yet all this while in a most fast sleep.

Doctor	A great perturbation in nature, to receive at once
	the benefit of sleep, and do the effects of
	watching! In this slumbery agitation, besides her
	walking and other actual performances, what, at any
	time, have you heard her say?

Gentlewoman	That, sir, which I will not report after her.

Doctor	You may to me: and 'tis most meet you should.

Gentlewoman	Neither to you nor any one; having no witness to
	confirm my speech.

	[Enter LADY MACBETH, with a taper]

	Lo you, here she comes! This is her very guise;
	and, upon my life, fast asleep. Observe her; stand close.

Doctor	How came she by that light?

Gentlewoman	Why, it stood by her: she has light by her
	continually; 'tis her command.

Doctor	You see, her eyes are open.

Gentlewoman	Ay, but their sense is shut.

Doctor	What is it she does now? Look, how she rubs her hands.

Gentlewoman	It is an accustomed action with her, to seem thus
	washing her hands: I have known her continue in
	this a quarter of an hour.

LADY MACBETH	Yet here's a spot.

Doctor	Hark! she speaks: I will set down what comes from
	her, to satisfy my remembrance the more strongly.

LADY MACBETH	Out, damned spot! out, I say!--One: two: why,
	then, 'tis time to do't.--Hell is murky!--Fie, my
	lord, fie! a soldier, and afeard? What need we
	fear who knows it, when none can call our power to
	account?--Yet who would have thought the old man
	to have had so much blood in him.

Doctor	Do you mark that?

LADY MACBETH	The thane of Fife had a wife: where is she now?--
	What, will these hands ne'er be clean?--No more o'
	that, my lord, no more o' that: you mar all with
	this starting.

Doctor	Go to, go to; you have known what you should not.

Gentlewoman	She has spoke what she should not, I am sure of
	that: heaven knows what she has known.

LADY MACBETH	Here's the smell of the blood still: all the
	perfumes of Arabia will not sweeten this little
	hand. Oh, oh, oh!

Doctor	What a sigh is there! The heart is sorely charged.

Gentlewoman	I would not have such a heart in my bosom for the
	dignity of the whole body.

Doctor	Well, well, well,--

Gentlewoman	Pray God it be, sir.

Doctor	This disease is beyond my practise: yet I have known
	those which have walked in their sleep who have died
	holily in their beds.

LADY MACBETH	Wash your hands, put on your nightgown; look not so
	pale.--I tell you yet again, Banquo's buried; he
	cannot come out on's grave.

Doctor	Even so?

LADY MACBETH	To bed, to bed! there's knocking at the gate:
	come, come, come, come, give me your hand. What's
	done cannot be undone.--To bed, to bed, to bed!

	[Exit]

Doctor	Will she go now to bed?

Gentlewoman	Directly.

Doctor	Foul whisperings are abroad: unnatural deeds
	Do breed unnatural troubles: infected minds
	To their deaf pillows will discharge their secrets:
	More needs she the divine than the physician.
	God, God forgive us all! Look after her;
	Remove from her the means of all annoyance,
	And still keep eyes upon her. So, good night:
	My mind she has mated, and amazed my sight.
	I think, but dare not speak.

Gentlewoman	Good night, good doctor.

	[Exeunt]




	MACBETH

ACT V



SCENE II	The country near Dunsinane.


	[Drum and colours. Enter MENTEITH, CAITHNESS, ANGUS,
	LENNOX, and Soldiers]

MENTEITH	The English power is near, led on by Malcolm,
	His uncle Siward and the good Macduff:
	Revenges burn in them; for their dear causes
	Would to the bleeding and the grim alarm
	Excite the mortified man.

ANGUS	Near Birnam wood
	Shall we well meet them; that way are they coming.

CAITHNESS	Who knows if Donalbain be with his brother?

LENNOX	For certain, sir, he is not: I have a file
	Of all the gentry: there is Siward's son,
	And many unrough youths that even now
	Protest their first of manhood.

MENTEITH	What does the tyrant?

CAITHNESS	Great Dunsinane he strongly fortifies:
	Some say he's mad; others that lesser hate him
	Do call it valiant fury: but, for certain,
	He cannot buckle his distemper'd cause
	Within the belt of rule.

ANGUS	Now does he feel
	His secret murders sticking on his hands;
	Now minutely revolts upbraid his faith-breach;
	Those he commands move only in command,
	Nothing in love: now does he feel his title
	Hang loose about him, like a giant's robe
	Upon a dwarfish thief.

MENTEITH	Who then shall blame
	His pester'd senses to recoil and start,
	When all that is within him does condemn
	Itself for being there?

CAITHNESS	Well, march we on,
	To give obedience where 'tis truly owed:
	Meet we the medicine of the sickly weal,
	And with him pour we in our country's purge
	Each drop of us.

LENNOX	                  Or so much as it needs,
	To dew the sovereign flower and drown the weeds.
	Make we our march towards Birnam.

	[Exeunt, marching]




	MACBETH


ACT V



SCENE III	Dunsinane. A room in the castle.


	[Enter MACBETH, Doctor, and Attendants]

MACBETH	Bring me no more reports; let them fly all:
	Till Birnam wood remove to Dunsinane,
	I cannot taint with fear. What's the boy Malcolm?
	Was he not born of woman? The spirits that know
	All mortal consequences have pronounced me thus:
	'Fear not, Macbeth; no man that's born of woman
	Shall e'er have power upon thee.' Then fly,
	false thanes,
	And mingle with the English epicures:
	The mind I sway by and the heart I bear
	Shall never sag with doubt nor shake with fear.

	[Enter a Servant]

	The devil damn thee black, thou cream-faced loon!
	Where got'st thou that goose look?

Servant	There is ten thousand--

MACBETH	Geese, villain!

Servant	Soldiers, sir.

MACBETH	Go prick thy face, and over-red thy fear,
	Thou lily-liver'd boy. What soldiers, patch?
	Death of thy soul! those linen cheeks of thine
	Are counsellors to fear. What soldiers, whey-face?

Servant	The English force, so please you.

MACBETH	Take thy face hence.

	[Exit Servant]

		Seyton!--I am sick at heart,
	When I behold--Seyton, I say!--This push
	Will cheer me ever, or disseat me now.
	I have lived long enough: my way of life
	Is fall'n into the sear, the yellow leaf;
	And that which should accompany old age,
	As honour, love, obedience, troops of friends,
	I must not look to have; but, in their stead,
	Curses, not loud but deep, mouth-honour, breath,
	Which the poor heart would fain deny, and dare not. Seyton!

	[Enter SEYTON]

SEYTON	What is your gracious pleasure?

MACBETH	What news more?

SEYTON	All is confirm'd, my lord, which was reported.

MACBETH	I'll fight till from my bones my flesh be hack'd.
	Give me my armour.

SEYTON	'Tis not needed yet.

MACBETH	I'll put it on.
	Send out more horses; skirr the country round;
	Hang those that talk of fear. Give me mine armour.
	How does your patient, doctor?

Doctor	Not so sick, my lord,
	As she is troubled with thick coming fancies,
	That keep her from her rest.

MACBETH	Cure her of that.
	Canst thou not minister to a mind diseased,
	Pluck from the memory a rooted sorrow,
	Raze out the written troubles of the brain
	And with some sweet oblivious antidote
	Cleanse the stuff'd bosom of that perilous stuff
	Which weighs upon the heart?

Doctor	Therein the patient
	Must minister to himself.

MACBETH	Throw physic to the dogs; I'll none of it.
	Come, put mine armour on; give me my staff.
	Seyton, send out. Doctor, the thanes fly from me.
	Come, sir, dispatch. If thou couldst, doctor, cast
	The water of my land, find her disease,
	And purge it to a sound and pristine health,
	I would applaud thee to the very echo,
	That should applaud again.--Pull't off, I say.--
	What rhubarb, cyme, or what purgative drug,
	Would scour these English hence? Hear'st thou of them?

Doctor	Ay, my good lord; your royal preparation
	Makes us hear something.

MACBETH	Bring it after me.
	I will not be afraid of death and bane,
	Till Birnam forest come to Dunsinane.

Doctor	[Aside]  Were I from Dunsinane away and clear,
	Profit again should hardly draw me here.

	[Exeunt]




	MACBETH


ACT V



SCENE IV	Country near Birnam wood.


	[Drum and colours. Enter MALCOLM, SIWARD and YOUNG
	SIWARD, MACDUFF, MENTEITH, CAITHNESS, ANGUS,
	LENNOX, ROSS, and Soldiers, marching]

MALCOLM	Cousins, I hope the days are near at hand
	That chambers will be safe.

MENTEITH	We doubt it nothing.

SIWARD	What wood is this before us?

MENTEITH	The wood of Birnam.

MALCOLM	Let every soldier hew him down a bough
	And bear't before him: thereby shall we shadow
	The numbers of our host and make discovery
	Err in report of us.

Soldiers	It shall be done.

SIWARD	We learn no other but the confident tyrant
	Keeps still in Dunsinane, and will endure
	Our setting down before 't.

MALCOLM	'Tis his main hope:
	For where there is advantage to be given,
	Both more and less have given him the revolt,
	And none serve with him but constrained things
	Whose hearts are absent too.

MACDUFF	Let our just censures
	Attend the true event, and put we on
	Industrious soldiership.

SIWARD	The time approaches
	That will with due decision make us know
	What we shall say we have and what we owe.
	Thoughts speculative their unsure hopes relate,
	But certain issue strokes must arbitrate:
	Towards which advance the war.

	[Exeunt, marching]




	MACBETH


ACT V



SCENE V	Dunsinane. Within the castle.


	[Enter MACBETH, SEYTON, and Soldiers, with drum
	and colours]

MACBETH	Hang out our banners on the outward walls;
	The cry is still 'They come:' our castle's strength
	Will laugh a siege to scorn: here let them lie
	Till famine and the ague eat them up:
	Were they not forced with those that should be ours,
	We might have met them dareful, beard to beard,
	And beat them backward home.

	[A cry of women within]

		       What is that noise?

SEYTON	It is the cry of women, my good lord.

	[Exit]

MACBETH	I have almost forgot the taste of fears;
	The time has been, my senses would have cool'd
	To hear a night-shriek; and my fell of hair
	Would at a dismal treatise rouse and stir
	As life were in't: I have supp'd full with horrors;
	Direness, familiar to my slaughterous thoughts
	Cannot once start me.

	[Re-enter SEYTON]

		Wherefore was that cry?

SEYTON	The queen, my lord, is dead.

MACBETH	She should have died hereafter;
	There would have been a time for such a word.
	To-morrow, and to-morrow, and to-morrow,
	Creeps in this petty pace from day to day
	To the last syllable of recorded time,
	And all our yesterdays have lighted fools
	The way to dusty death. Out, out, brief candle!
	Life's but a walking shadow, a poor player
	That struts and frets his hour upon the stage
	And then is heard no more: it is a tale
	Told by an idiot, full of sound and fury,
	Signifying nothing.

	[Enter a Messenger]

	Thou comest to use thy tongue; thy story quickly.

Messenger	Gracious my lord,
	I should report that which I say I saw,
	But know not how to do it.

MACBETH	Well, say, sir.

Messenger	As I did stand my watch upon the hill,
	I look'd toward Birnam, and anon, methought,
	The wood began to move.

MACBETH	Liar and slave!

Messenger	Let me endure your wrath, if't be not so:
	Within this three mile may you see it coming;
	I say, a moving grove.

MACBETH	If thou speak'st false,
	Upon the next tree shalt thou hang alive,
	Till famine cling thee: if thy speech be sooth,
	I care not if thou dost for me as much.
	I pull in resolution, and begin
	To doubt the equivocation of the fiend
	That lies like truth: 'Fear not, till Birnam wood
	Do come to Dunsinane:'  and now a wood
	Comes toward Dunsinane. Arm, arm, and out!
	If this which he avouches does appear,
	There is nor flying hence nor tarrying here.
	I gin to be aweary of the sun,
	And wish the estate o' the world were now undone.
	Ring the alarum-bell! Blow, wind! come, wrack!
	At least we'll die with harness on our back.

	[Exeunt]




	MACBETH


ACT V



SCENE VI	Dunsinane. Before the castle.


	[Drum and colours. Enter MALCOLM, SIWARD, MACDUFF,
	and their Army, with boughs]

MALCOLM	Now near enough: your leafy screens throw down.
	And show like those you are. You, worthy uncle,
	Shall, with my cousin, your right-noble son,
	Lead our first battle: worthy Macduff and we
	Shall take upon 's what else remains to do,
	According to our order.

SIWARD	Fare you well.
	Do we but find the tyrant's power to-night,
	Let us be beaten, if we cannot fight.

MACDUFF	Make all our trumpets speak; give them all breath,
	Those clamorous harbingers of blood and death.

	[Exeunt]




	MACBETH


ACT V



SCENE VII	Another part of the field.


	[Alarums. Enter MACBETH]

MACBETH	They have tied me to a stake; I cannot fly,
	But, bear-like, I must fight the course. What's he
	That was not born of woman? Such a one
	Am I to fear, or none.

	[Enter YOUNG SIWARD]

YOUNG SIWARD	What is thy name?

MACBETH	                  Thou'lt be afraid to hear it.

YOUNG SIWARD	No; though thou call'st thyself a hotter name
	Than any is in hell.

MACBETH	My name's Macbeth.

YOUNG SIWARD	The devil himself could not pronounce a title
	More hateful to mine ear.

MACBETH	No, nor more fearful.

YOUNG SIWARD	Thou liest, abhorred tyrant; with my sword
	I'll prove the lie thou speak'st.

	[They fight and YOUNG SIWARD is slain]

MACBETH	Thou wast born of woman
	But swords I smile at, weapons laugh to scorn,
	Brandish'd by man that's of a woman born.

	[Exit]

	[Alarums. Enter MACDUFF]

MACDUFF	That way the noise is. Tyrant, show thy face!
	If thou be'st slain and with no stroke of mine,
	My wife and children's ghosts will haunt me still.
	I cannot strike at wretched kerns, whose arms
	Are hired to bear their staves: either thou, Macbeth,
	Or else my sword with an unbatter'd edge
	I sheathe again undeeded. There thou shouldst be;
	By this great clatter, one of greatest note
	Seems bruited. Let me find him, fortune!
	And more I beg not.

	[Exit. Alarums]

	[Enter MALCOLM and SIWARD]

SIWARD	This way, my lord; the castle's gently render'd:
	The tyrant's people on both sides do fight;
	The noble thanes do bravely in the war;
	The day almost itself professes yours,
	And little is to do.

MALCOLM	We have met with foes
	That strike beside us.

SIWARD	Enter, sir, the castle.

	[Exeunt. Alarums]




	MACBETH


ACT V



SCENE VIII	Another part of the field.


	[Enter MACBETH]

MACBETH	Why should I play the Roman fool, and die
	On mine own sword? whiles I see lives, the gashes
	Do better upon them.

	[Enter MACDUFF]

MACDUFF	Turn, hell-hound, turn!

MACBETH	Of all men else I have avoided thee:
	But get thee back; my soul is too much charged
	With blood of thine already.

MACDUFF	I have no words:
	My voice is in my sword: thou bloodier villain
	Than terms can give thee out!

	[They fight]

MACBETH	Thou losest labour:
	As easy mayst thou the intrenchant air
	With thy keen sword impress as make me bleed:
	Let fall thy blade on vulnerable crests;
	I bear a charmed life, which must not yield,
	To one of woman born.

MACDUFF	Despair thy charm;
	And let the angel whom thou still hast served
	Tell thee, Macduff was from his mother's womb
	Untimely ripp'd.

MACBETH	Accursed be that tongue that tells me so,
	For it hath cow'd my better part of man!
	And be these juggling fiends no more believed,
	That palter with us in a double sense;
	That keep the word of promise to our ear,
	And break it to our hope. I'll not fight with thee.

MACDUFF	Then yield thee, coward,
	And live to be the show and gaze o' the time:
	We'll have thee, as our rarer monsters are,
	Painted on a pole, and underwrit,
	'Here may you see the tyrant.'

MACBETH	I will not yield,
	To kiss the ground before young Malcolm's feet,
	And to be baited with the rabble's curse.
	Though Birnam wood be come to Dunsinane,
	And thou opposed, being of no woman born,
	Yet I will try the last. Before my body
	I throw my warlike shield. Lay on, Macduff,
	And damn'd be him that first cries, 'Hold, enough!'

	[Exeunt, fighting. Alarums]

	[Retreat. Flourish. Enter, with drum and colours,
	MALCOLM, SIWARD, ROSS, the other Thanes, and Soldiers]

MALCOLM	I would the friends we miss were safe arrived.

SIWARD	Some must go off: and yet, by these I see,
	So great a day as this is cheaply bought.

MALCOLM	Macduff is missing, and your noble son.

ROSS	Your son, my lord, has paid a soldier's debt:
	He only lived but till he was a man;
	The which no sooner had his prowess confirm'd
	In the unshrinking station where he fought,
	But like a man he died.

SIWARD	Then he is dead?

ROSS	Ay, and brought off the field: your cause of sorrow
	Must not be measured by his worth, for then
	It hath no end.

SIWARD	                  Had he his hurts before?

ROSS	Ay, on the front.

SIWARD	                  Why then, God's soldier be he!
	Had I as many sons as I have hairs,
	I would not wish them to a fairer death:
	And so, his knell is knoll'd.

MALCOLM	He's worth more sorrow,
	And that I'll spend for him.

SIWARD	He's worth no more
	They say he parted well, and paid his score:
	And so, God be with him! Here comes newer comfort.

	[Re-enter MACDUFF, with MACBETH's head]

MACDUFF	Hail, king! for so thou art: behold, where stands
	The usurper's cursed head: the time is free:
	I see thee compass'd with thy kingdom's pearl,
	That speak my salutation in their minds;
	Whose voices I desire aloud with mine:
	Hail, King of Scotland!

ALL	Hail, King of Scotland!

	[Flourish]

MALCOLM	We shall not spend a large expense of time
	Before we reckon with your several loves,
	And make us even with you. My thanes and kinsmen,
	Henceforth be earls, the first that ever Scotland
	In such an honour named. What's more to do,
	Which would be planted newly with the time,
	As calling home our exiled friends abroad
	That fled the snares of watchful tyranny;
	Producing forth the cruel ministers
	Of this dead butcher and his fiend-like queen,
	Who, as 'tis thought, by self and violent hands
	Took off her life; this, and what needful else
	That calls upon us, by the grace of Grace,
	We will perform in measure, time and place:
	So, thanks to all at once and to each one,
	Whom we invite to see us crown'd at Scone.

	[Flourish. Exeunt]


	A MIDSUMMER NIGHT'S DREAM


	DRAMATIS PERSONAE


THESEUS	Duke of Athens.

EGEUS	father to Hermia.


LYSANDER	|
	|  in love with Hermia.
DEMETRIUS	|


PHILOSTRATE	master of the revels to Theseus.

QUINCE	a carpenter.

SNUG	a joiner.

BOTTOM	a weaver.

FLUTE	a bellows-mender.

SNOUT	a tinker.

STARVELING	a tailor.

HIPPOLYTA	queen of the Amazons, betrothed to Theseus.

HERMIA	daughter to Egeus, in love with Lysander.

HELENA	in love with Demetrius.

OBERON	king of the fairies.

TITANIA	queen of the fairies.

PUCK	or Robin Goodfellow.


PEASEBLOSSOM	|
	|
COBWEB	|
	|  fairies.
MOTH	|
	|
MUSTARDSEED	|


	Other fairies attending their King and Queen.

	Attendants on Theseus and Hippolyta.

SCENE	Athens, and a wood near it.




	A MIDSUMMER NIGHT'S DREAM


ACT I



SCENE I	Athens. The palace of THESEUS.


	[Enter THESEUS, HIPPOLYTA, PHILOSTRATE, and
	Attendants]

THESEUS	Now, fair Hippolyta, our nuptial hour
	Draws on apace; four happy days bring in
	Another moon: but, O, methinks, how slow
	This old moon wanes! she lingers my desires,
	Like to a step-dame or a dowager
	Long withering out a young man revenue.

HIPPOLYTA	Four days will quickly steep themselves in night;
	Four nights will quickly dream away the time;
	And then the moon, like to a silver bow
	New-bent in heaven, shall behold the night
	Of our solemnities.

THESEUS	Go, Philostrate,
	Stir up the Athenian youth to merriments;
	Awake the pert and nimble spirit of mirth;
	Turn melancholy forth to funerals;
	The pale companion is not for our pomp.

	[Exit PHILOSTRATE]

	Hippolyta, I woo'd thee with my sword,
	And won thy love, doing thee injuries;
	But I will wed thee in another key,
	With pomp, with triumph and with revelling.

	[Enter EGEUS, HERMIA, LYSANDER, and DEMETRIUS]

EGEUS	Happy be Theseus, our renowned duke!

THESEUS	Thanks, good Egeus: what's the news with thee?

EGEUS	Full of vexation come I, with complaint
	Against my child, my daughter Hermia.
	Stand forth, Demetrius. My noble lord,
	This man hath my consent to marry her.
	Stand forth, Lysander: and my gracious duke,
	This man hath bewitch'd the bosom of my child;
	Thou, thou, Lysander, thou hast given her rhymes,
	And interchanged love-tokens with my child:
	Thou hast by moonlight at her window sung,
	With feigning voice verses of feigning love,
	And stolen the impression of her fantasy
	With bracelets of thy hair, rings, gawds, conceits,
	Knacks, trifles, nosegays, sweetmeats, messengers
	Of strong prevailment in unharden'd youth:
	With cunning hast thou filch'd my daughter's heart,
	Turn'd her obedience, which is due to me,
	To stubborn harshness: and, my gracious duke,
	Be it so she; will not here before your grace
	Consent to marry with Demetrius,
	I beg the ancient privilege of Athens,
	As she is mine, I may dispose of her:
	Which shall be either to this gentleman
	Or to her death, according to our law
	Immediately provided in that case.

THESEUS	What say you, Hermia? be advised fair maid:
	To you your father should be as a god;
	One that composed your beauties, yea, and one
	To whom you are but as a form in wax
	By him imprinted and within his power
	To leave the figure or disfigure it.
	Demetrius is a worthy gentleman.

HERMIA	So is Lysander.

THESEUS	                  In himself he is;
	But in this kind, wanting your father's voice,
	The other must be held the worthier.

HERMIA	I would my father look'd but with my eyes.

THESEUS	Rather your eyes must with his judgment look.

HERMIA	I do entreat your grace to pardon me.
	I know not by what power I am made bold,
	Nor how it may concern my modesty,
	In such a presence here to plead my thoughts;
	But I beseech your grace that I may know
	The worst that may befall me in this case,
	If I refuse to wed Demetrius.

THESEUS	Either to die the death or to abjure
	For ever the society of men.
	Therefore, fair Hermia, question your desires;
	Know of your youth, examine well your blood,
	Whether, if you yield not to your father's choice,
	You can endure the livery of a nun,
	For aye to be in shady cloister mew'd,
	To live a barren sister all your life,
	Chanting faint hymns to the cold fruitless moon.
	Thrice-blessed they that master so their blood,
	To undergo such maiden pilgrimage;
	But earthlier happy is the rose distill'd,
	Than that which withering on the virgin thorn
	Grows, lives and dies in single blessedness.

HERMIA	So will I grow, so live, so die, my lord,
	Ere I will my virgin patent up
	Unto his lordship, whose unwished yoke
	My soul consents not to give sovereignty.

THESEUS	Take time to pause; and, by the nest new moon--
	The sealing-day betwixt my love and me,
	For everlasting bond of fellowship--
	Upon that day either prepare to die
	For disobedience to your father's will,
	Or else to wed Demetrius, as he would;
	Or on Diana's altar to protest
	For aye austerity and single life.

DEMETRIUS	Relent, sweet Hermia: and, Lysander, yield
	Thy crazed title to my certain right.

LYSANDER	You have her father's love, Demetrius;
	Let me have Hermia's: do you marry him.

EGEUS	Scornful Lysander! true, he hath my love,
	And what is mine my love shall render him.
	And she is mine, and all my right of her
	I do estate unto Demetrius.

LYSANDER	I am, my lord, as well derived as he,
	As well possess'd; my love is more than his;
	My fortunes every way as fairly rank'd,
	If not with vantage, as Demetrius';
	And, which is more than all these boasts can be,
	I am beloved of beauteous Hermia:
	Why should not I then prosecute my right?
	Demetrius, I'll avouch it to his head,
	Made love to Nedar's daughter, Helena,
	And won her soul; and she, sweet lady, dotes,
	Devoutly dotes, dotes in idolatry,
	Upon this spotted and inconstant man.

THESEUS	I must confess that I have heard so much,
	And with Demetrius thought to have spoke thereof;
	But, being over-full of self-affairs,
	My mind did lose it. But, Demetrius, come;
	And come, Egeus; you shall go with me,
	I have some private schooling for you both.
	For you, fair Hermia, look you arm yourself
	To fit your fancies to your father's will;
	Or else the law of Athens yields you up--
	Which by no means we may extenuate--
	To death, or to a vow of single life.
	Come, my Hippolyta: what cheer, my love?
	Demetrius and Egeus, go along:
	I must employ you in some business
	Against our nuptial and confer with you
	Of something nearly that concerns yourselves.

EGEUS	With duty and desire we follow you.

	[Exeunt all but LYSANDER and HERMIA]

LYSANDER	How now, my love! why is your cheek so pale?
	How chance the roses there do fade so fast?

HERMIA	Belike for want of rain, which I could well
	Beteem them from the tempest of my eyes.

LYSANDER	Ay me! for aught that I could ever read,
	Could ever hear by tale or history,
	The course of true love never did run smooth;
	But, either it was different in blood,--

HERMIA	O cross! too high to be enthrall'd to low.

LYSANDER	Or else misgraffed in respect of years,--

HERMIA	O spite! too old to be engaged to young.

LYSANDER	Or else it stood upon the choice of friends,--

HERMIA	O hell! to choose love by another's eyes.

LYSANDER	Or, if there were a sympathy in choice,
	War, death, or sickness did lay siege to it,
	Making it momentany as a sound,
	Swift as a shadow, short as any dream;
	Brief as the lightning in the collied night,
	That, in a spleen, unfolds both heaven and earth,
	And ere a man hath power to say 'Behold!'
	The jaws of darkness do devour it up:
	So quick bright things come to confusion.

HERMIA	If then true lovers have been ever cross'd,
	It stands as an edict in destiny:
	Then let us teach our trial patience,
	Because it is a customary cross,
	As due to love as thoughts and dreams and sighs,
	Wishes and tears, poor fancy's followers.

LYSANDER	A good persuasion: therefore, hear me, Hermia.
	I have a widow aunt, a dowager
	Of great revenue, and she hath no child:
	From Athens is her house remote seven leagues;
	And she respects me as her only son.
	There, gentle Hermia, may I marry thee;
	And to that place the sharp Athenian law
	Cannot pursue us. If thou lovest me then,
	Steal forth thy father's house to-morrow night;
	And in the wood, a league without the town,
	Where I did meet thee once with Helena,
	To do observance to a morn of May,
	There will I stay for thee.

HERMIA	My good Lysander!
	I swear to thee, by Cupid's strongest bow,
	By his best arrow with the golden head,
	By the simplicity of Venus' doves,
	By that which knitteth souls and prospers loves,
	And by that fire which burn'd the Carthage queen,
	When the false Troyan under sail was seen,
	By all the vows that ever men have broke,
	In number more than ever women spoke,
	In that same place thou hast appointed me,
	To-morrow truly will I meet with thee.

LYSANDER	Keep promise, love. Look, here comes Helena.

	[Enter HELENA]

HERMIA	God speed fair Helena! whither away?

HELENA	Call you me fair? that fair again unsay.
	Demetrius loves your fair: O happy fair!
	Your eyes are lode-stars; and your tongue's sweet air
	More tuneable than lark to shepherd's ear,
	When wheat is green, when hawthorn buds appear.
	Sickness is catching: O, were favour so,
	Yours would I catch, fair Hermia, ere I go;
	My ear should catch your voice, my eye your eye,
	My tongue should catch your tongue's sweet melody.
	Were the world mine, Demetrius being bated,
	The rest I'd give to be to you translated.
	O, teach me how you look, and with what art
	You sway the motion of Demetrius' heart.

HERMIA	I frown upon him, yet he loves me still.

HELENA	O that your frowns would teach my smiles such skill!

HERMIA	I give him curses, yet he gives me love.

HELENA	O that my prayers could such affection move!

HERMIA	The more I hate, the more he follows me.

HELENA	The more I love, the more he hateth me.

HERMIA	His folly, Helena, is no fault of mine.

HELENA	None, but your beauty: would that fault were mine!

HERMIA	Take comfort: he no more shall see my face;
	Lysander and myself will fly this place.
	Before the time I did Lysander see,
	Seem'd Athens as a paradise to me:
	O, then, what graces in my love do dwell,
	That he hath turn'd a heaven unto a hell!

LYSANDER	Helen, to you our minds we will unfold:
	To-morrow night, when Phoebe doth behold
	Her silver visage in the watery glass,
	Decking with liquid pearl the bladed grass,
	A time that lovers' flights doth still conceal,
	Through Athens' gates have we devised to steal.

HERMIA	And in the wood, where often you and I
	Upon faint primrose-beds were wont to lie,
	Emptying our bosoms of their counsel sweet,
	There my Lysander and myself shall meet;
	And thence from Athens turn away our eyes,
	To seek new friends and stranger companies.
	Farewell, sweet playfellow: pray thou for us;
	And good luck grant thee thy Demetrius!
	Keep word, Lysander: we must starve our sight
	From lovers' food till morrow deep midnight.

LYSANDER	I will, my Hermia.

	[Exit HERMIA]

	Helena, adieu:
	As you on him, Demetrius dote on you!

	[Exit]

HELENA	How happy some o'er other some can be!
	Through Athens I am thought as fair as she.
	But what of that? Demetrius thinks not so;
	He will not know what all but he do know:
	And as he errs, doting on Hermia's eyes,
	So I, admiring of his qualities:
	Things base and vile, folding no quantity,
	Love can transpose to form and dignity:
	Love looks not with the eyes, but with the mind;
	And therefore is wing'd Cupid painted blind:
	Nor hath Love's mind of any judgement taste;
	Wings and no eyes figure unheedy haste:
	And therefore is Love said to be a child,
	Because in choice he is so oft beguiled.
	As waggish boys in game themselves forswear,
	So the boy Love is perjured every where:
	For ere Demetrius look'd on Hermia's eyne,
	He hail'd down oaths that he was only mine;
	And when this hail some heat from Hermia felt,
	So he dissolved, and showers of oaths did melt.
	I will go tell him of fair Hermia's flight:
	Then to the wood will he to-morrow night
	Pursue her; and for this intelligence
	If I have thanks, it is a dear expense:
	But herein mean I to enrich my pain,
	To have his sight thither and back again.

	[Exit]




	A MIDSUMMER NIGHT'S DREAM


ACT I



SCENE II	Athens. QUINCE'S house.


	[Enter QUINCE, SNUG, BOTTOM, FLUTE, SNOUT, and
	STARVELING]

QUINCE	Is all our company here?

BOTTOM	You were best to call them generally, man by man,
	according to the scrip.

QUINCE	Here is the scroll of every man's name, which is
	thought fit, through all Athens, to play in our
	interlude before the duke and the duchess, on his
	wedding-day at night.

BOTTOM	First, good Peter Quince, say what the play treats
	on, then read the names of the actors, and so grow
	to a point.

QUINCE	Marry, our play is, The most lamentable comedy, and
	most cruel death of Pyramus and Thisby.

BOTTOM	A very good piece of work, I assure you, and a
	merry. Now, good Peter Quince, call forth your
	actors by the scroll. Masters, spread yourselves.

QUINCE	Answer as I call you. Nick Bottom, the weaver.

BOTTOM	Ready. Name what part I am for, and proceed.

QUINCE	You, Nick Bottom, are set down for Pyramus.

BOTTOM	What is Pyramus? a lover, or a tyrant?

QUINCE	A lover, that kills himself most gallant for love.

BOTTOM	That will ask some tears in the true performing of
	it: if I do it, let the audience look to their
	eyes; I will move storms, I will condole in some
	measure. To the rest: yet my chief humour is for a
	tyrant: I could play Ercles rarely, or a part to
	tear a cat in, to make all split.
	The raging rocks
	And shivering shocks
	Shall break the locks
	Of prison gates;
	And Phibbus' car
	Shall shine from far
	And make and mar
	The foolish Fates.
	This was lofty! Now name the rest of the players.
	This is Ercles' vein, a tyrant's vein; a lover is
	more condoling.

QUINCE	Francis Flute, the bellows-mender.

FLUTE	Here, Peter Quince.

QUINCE	Flute, you must take Thisby on you.

FLUTE	What is Thisby? a wandering knight?

QUINCE	It is the lady that Pyramus must love.

FLUTE	Nay, faith, let me not play a woman; I have a beard coming.

QUINCE	That's all one: you shall play it in a mask, and
	you may speak as small as you will.

BOTTOM	An I may hide my face, let me play Thisby too, I'll
	speak in a monstrous little voice. 'Thisne,
	Thisne;' 'Ah, Pyramus, lover dear! thy Thisby dear,
	and lady dear!'

QUINCE	No, no; you must play Pyramus: and, Flute, you Thisby.

BOTTOM	Well, proceed.

QUINCE	Robin Starveling, the tailor.

STARVELING	Here, Peter Quince.

QUINCE	Robin Starveling, you must play Thisby's mother.
	Tom Snout, the tinker.

SNOUT	Here, Peter Quince.

QUINCE	You, Pyramus' father: myself, Thisby's father:
	Snug, the joiner; you, the lion's part: and, I
	hope, here is a play fitted.

SNUG	Have you the lion's part written? pray you, if it
	be, give it me, for I am slow of study.

QUINCE	You may do it extempore, for it is nothing but roaring.

BOTTOM	Let me play the lion too: I will roar, that I will
	do any man's heart good to hear me; I will roar,
	that I will make the duke say 'Let him roar again,
	let him roar again.'

QUINCE	An you should do it too terribly, you would fright
	the duchess and the ladies, that they would shriek;
	and that were enough to hang us all.

ALL	That would hang us, every mother's son.

BOTTOM	I grant you, friends, if that you should fright the
	ladies out of their wits, they would have no more
	discretion but to hang us: but I will aggravate my
	voice so that I will roar you as gently as any
	sucking dove; I will roar you an 'twere any
	nightingale.

QUINCE	You can play no part but Pyramus; for Pyramus is a
	sweet-faced man; a proper man, as one shall see in a
	summer's day; a most lovely gentleman-like man:
	therefore you must needs play Pyramus.

BOTTOM	Well, I will undertake it. What beard were I best
	to play it in?

QUINCE	Why, what you will.

BOTTOM	I will discharge it in either your straw-colour
	beard, your orange-tawny beard, your purple-in-grain
	beard, or your French-crown-colour beard, your
	perfect yellow.

QUINCE	Some of your French crowns have no hair at all, and
	then you will play bare-faced. But, masters, here
	are your parts: and I am to entreat you, request
	you and desire you, to con them by to-morrow night;
	and meet me in the palace wood, a mile without the
	town, by moonlight; there will we rehearse, for if
	we meet in the city, we shall be dogged with
	company, and our devices known. In the meantime I
	will draw a bill of properties, such as our play
	wants. I pray you, fail me not.

BOTTOM	We will meet; and there we may rehearse most
	obscenely and courageously. Take pains; be perfect: adieu.

QUINCE	At the duke's oak we meet.

BOTTOM	Enough; hold or cut bow-strings.

	[Exeunt]




	A MIDSUMMER NIGHT'S DREAM


ACT II



SCENE I	A wood near Athens.


	[Enter, from opposite sides, a Fairy, and PUCK]

PUCK	How now, spirit! whither wander you?

Fairy	     Over hill, over dale,
	Thorough bush, thorough brier,
	Over park, over pale,
	Thorough flood, thorough fire,
	I do wander everywhere,
	Swifter than the moon's sphere;
	And I serve the fairy queen,
	To dew her orbs upon the green.
	The cowslips tall her pensioners be:
	In their gold coats spots you see;
	Those be rubies, fairy favours,
	In those freckles live their savours:
	I must go seek some dewdrops here
	And hang a pearl in every cowslip's ear.
	Farewell, thou lob of spirits; I'll be gone:
	Our queen and all our elves come here anon.

PUCK	The king doth keep his revels here to-night:
	Take heed the queen come not within his sight;
	For Oberon is passing fell and wrath,
	Because that she as her attendant hath
	A lovely boy, stolen from an Indian king;
	She never had so sweet a changeling;
	And jealous Oberon would have the child
	Knight of his train, to trace the forests wild;
	But she perforce withholds the loved boy,
	Crowns him with flowers and makes him all her joy:
	And now they never meet in grove or green,
	By fountain clear, or spangled starlight sheen,
	But, they do square, that all their elves for fear
	Creep into acorn-cups and hide them there.

Fairy	Either I mistake your shape and making quite,
	Or else you are that shrewd and knavish sprite
	Call'd Robin Goodfellow: are not you he
	That frights the maidens of the villagery;
	Skim milk, and sometimes labour in the quern
	And bootless make the breathless housewife churn;
	And sometime make the drink to bear no barm;
	Mislead night-wanderers, laughing at their harm?
	Those that Hobgoblin call you and sweet Puck,
	You do their work, and they shall have good luck:
	Are not you he?

PUCK	                  Thou speak'st aright;
	I am that merry wanderer of the night.
	I jest to Oberon and make him smile
	When I a fat and bean-fed horse beguile,
	Neighing in likeness of a filly foal:
	And sometime lurk I in a gossip's bowl,
	In very likeness of a roasted crab,
	And when she drinks, against her lips I bob
	And on her wither'd dewlap pour the ale.
	The wisest aunt, telling the saddest tale,
	Sometime for three-foot stool mistaketh me;
	Then slip I from her bum, down topples she,
	And 'tailor' cries, and falls into a cough;
	And then the whole quire hold their hips and laugh,
	And waxen in their mirth and neeze and swear
	A merrier hour was never wasted there.
	But, room, fairy! here comes Oberon.

Fairy	And here my mistress. Would that he were gone!

	[Enter, from one side, OBERON, with his train;
	from the other, TITANIA, with hers]

OBERON	Ill met by moonlight, proud Titania.

TITANIA	What, jealous Oberon! Fairies, skip hence:
	I have forsworn his bed and company.

OBERON	Tarry, rash wanton: am not I thy lord?

TITANIA	Then I must be thy lady: but I know
	When thou hast stolen away from fairy land,
	And in the shape of Corin sat all day,
	Playing on pipes of corn and versing love
	To amorous Phillida. Why art thou here,
	Come from the farthest Steppe of India?
	But that, forsooth, the bouncing Amazon,
	Your buskin'd mistress and your warrior love,
	To Theseus must be wedded, and you come
	To give their bed joy and prosperity.

OBERON	How canst thou thus for shame, Titania,
	Glance at my credit with Hippolyta,
	Knowing I know thy love to Theseus?
	Didst thou not lead him through the glimmering night
	From Perigenia, whom he ravished?
	And make him with fair AEgle break his faith,
	With Ariadne and Antiopa?

TITANIA	These are the forgeries of jealousy:
	And never, since the middle summer's spring,
	Met we on hill, in dale, forest or mead,
	By paved fountain or by rushy brook,
	Or in the beached margent of the sea,
	To dance our ringlets to the whistling wind,
	But with thy brawls thou hast disturb'd our sport.
	Therefore the winds, piping to us in vain,
	As in revenge, have suck'd up from the sea
	Contagious fogs; which falling in the land
	Have every pelting river made so proud
	That they have overborne their continents:
	The ox hath therefore stretch'd his yoke in vain,
	The ploughman lost his sweat, and the green corn
	Hath rotted ere his youth attain'd a beard;
	The fold stands empty in the drowned field,
	And crows are fatted with the murrion flock;
	The nine men's morris is fill'd up with mud,
	And the quaint mazes in the wanton green
	For lack of tread are undistinguishable:
	The human mortals want their winter here;
	No night is now with hymn or carol blest:
	Therefore the moon, the governess of floods,
	Pale in her anger, washes all the air,
	That rheumatic diseases do abound:
	And thorough this distemperature we see
	The seasons alter: hoary-headed frosts
	Far in the fresh lap of the crimson rose,
	And on old Hiems' thin and icy crown
	An odorous chaplet of sweet summer buds
	Is, as in mockery, set: the spring, the summer,
	The childing autumn, angry winter, change
	Their wonted liveries, and the mazed world,
	By their increase, now knows not which is which:
	And this same progeny of evils comes
	From our debate, from our dissension;
	We are their parents and original.

OBERON	Do you amend it then; it lies in you:
	Why should Titania cross her Oberon?
	I do but beg a little changeling boy,
	To be my henchman.

TITANIA	                  Set your heart at rest:
	The fairy land buys not the child of me.
	His mother was a votaress of my order:
	And, in the spiced Indian air, by night,
	Full often hath she gossip'd by my side,
	And sat with me on Neptune's yellow sands,
	Marking the embarked traders on the flood,
	When we have laugh'd to see the sails conceive
	And grow big-bellied with the wanton wind;
	Which she, with pretty and with swimming gait
	Following,--her womb then rich with my young squire,--
	Would imitate, and sail upon the land,
	To fetch me trifles, and return again,
	As from a voyage, rich with merchandise.
	But she, being mortal, of that boy did die;
	And for her sake do I rear up her boy,
	And for her sake I will not part with him.

OBERON	How long within this wood intend you stay?

TITANIA	Perchance till after Theseus' wedding-day.
	If you will patiently dance in our round
	And see our moonlight revels, go with us;
	If not, shun me, and I will spare your haunts.

OBERON	Give me that boy, and I will go with thee.

TITANIA	Not for thy fairy kingdom. Fairies, away!
	We shall chide downright, if I longer stay.

	[Exit TITANIA with her train]

OBERON	Well, go thy way: thou shalt not from this grove
	Till I torment thee for this injury.
	My gentle Puck, come hither. Thou rememberest
	Since once I sat upon a promontory,
	And heard a mermaid on a dolphin's back
	Uttering such dulcet and harmonious breath
	That the rude sea grew civil at her song
	And certain stars shot madly from their spheres,
	To hear the sea-maid's music.

PUCK	I remember.

OBERON	That very time I saw, but thou couldst not,
	Flying between the cold moon and the earth,
	Cupid all arm'd: a certain aim he took
	At a fair vestal throned by the west,
	And loosed his love-shaft smartly from his bow,
	As it should pierce a hundred thousand hearts;
	But I might see young Cupid's fiery shaft
	Quench'd in the chaste beams of the watery moon,
	And the imperial votaress passed on,
	In maiden meditation, fancy-free.
	Yet mark'd I where the bolt of Cupid fell:
	It fell upon a little western flower,
	Before milk-white, now purple with love's wound,
	And maidens call it love-in-idleness.
	Fetch me that flower; the herb I shew'd thee once:
	The juice of it on sleeping eye-lids laid
	Will make or man or woman madly dote
	Upon the next live creature that it sees.
	Fetch me this herb; and be thou here again
	Ere the leviathan can swim a league.

PUCK	I'll put a girdle round about the earth
	In forty minutes.

	[Exit]

OBERON	                  Having once this juice,
	I'll watch Titania when she is asleep,
	And drop the liquor of it in her eyes.
	The next thing then she waking looks upon,
	Be it on lion, bear, or wolf, or bull,
	On meddling monkey, or on busy ape,
	She shall pursue it with the soul of love:
	And ere I take this charm from off her sight,
	As I can take it with another herb,
	I'll make her render up her page to me.
	But who comes here? I am invisible;
	And I will overhear their conference.

	[Enter DEMETRIUS, HELENA, following him]

DEMETRIUS	I love thee not, therefore pursue me not.
	Where is Lysander and fair Hermia?
	The one I'll slay, the other slayeth me.
	Thou told'st me they were stolen unto this wood;
	And here am I, and wode within this wood,
	Because I cannot meet my Hermia.
	Hence, get thee gone, and follow me no more.

HELENA	You draw me, you hard-hearted adamant;
	But yet you draw not iron, for my heart
	Is true as steel: leave you your power to draw,
	And I shall have no power to follow you.

DEMETRIUS	Do I entice you? do I speak you fair?
	Or, rather, do I not in plainest truth
	Tell you, I do not, nor I cannot love you?

HELENA	And even for that do I love you the more.
	I am your spaniel; and, Demetrius,
	The more you beat me, I will fawn on you:
	Use me but as your spaniel, spurn me, strike me,
	Neglect me, lose me; only give me leave,
	Unworthy as I am, to follow you.
	What worser place can I beg in your love,--
	And yet a place of high respect with me,--
	Than to be used as you use your dog?

DEMETRIUS	Tempt not too much the hatred of my spirit;
	For I am sick when I do look on thee.

HELENA	And I am sick when I look not on you.

DEMETRIUS	You do impeach your modesty too much,
	To leave the city and commit yourself
	Into the hands of one that loves you not;
	To trust the opportunity of night
	And the ill counsel of a desert place
	With the rich worth of your virginity.

HELENA	Your virtue is my privilege: for that
	It is not night when I do see your face,
	Therefore I think I am not in the night;
	Nor doth this wood lack worlds of company,
	For you in my respect are all the world:
	Then how can it be said I am alone,
	When all the world is here to look on me?

DEMETRIUS	I'll run from thee and hide me in the brakes,
	And leave thee to the mercy of wild beasts.

HELENA	The wildest hath not such a heart as you.
	Run when you will, the story shall be changed:
	Apollo flies, and Daphne holds the chase;
	The dove pursues the griffin; the mild hind
	Makes speed to catch the tiger; bootless speed,
	When cowardice pursues and valour flies.

DEMETRIUS	I will not stay thy questions; let me go:
	Or, if thou follow me, do not believe
	But I shall do thee mischief in the wood.

HELENA	Ay, in the temple, in the town, the field,
	You do me mischief. Fie, Demetrius!
	Your wrongs do set a scandal on my sex:
	We cannot fight for love, as men may do;
	We should be wood and were not made to woo.

	[Exit DEMETRIUS]

	I'll follow thee and make a heaven of hell,
	To die upon the hand I love so well.

	[Exit]

OBERON	Fare thee well, nymph: ere he do leave this grove,
	Thou shalt fly him and he shall seek thy love.

	[Re-enter PUCK]

	Hast thou the flower there? Welcome, wanderer.

PUCK	Ay, there it is.

OBERON	I pray thee, give it me.
	I know a bank where the wild thyme blows,
	Where oxlips and the nodding violet grows,
	Quite over-canopied with luscious woodbine,
	With sweet musk-roses and with eglantine:
	There sleeps Titania sometime of the night,
	Lull'd in these flowers with dances and delight;
	And there the snake throws her enamell'd skin,
	Weed wide enough to wrap a fairy in:
	And with the juice of this I'll streak her eyes,
	And make her full of hateful fantasies.
	Take thou some of it, and seek through this grove:
	A sweet Athenian lady is in love
	With a disdainful youth: anoint his eyes;
	But do it when the next thing he espies
	May be the lady: thou shalt know the man
	By the Athenian garments he hath on.
	Effect it with some care, that he may prove
	More fond on her than she upon her love:
	And look thou meet me ere the first cock crow.

PUCK	Fear not, my lord, your servant shall do so.

	[Exeunt]




	A MIDSUMMER NIGHT'S DREAM


ACT II



SCENE II	Another part of the wood.


	[Enter TITANIA, with her train]

TITANIA	Come, now a roundel and a fairy song;
	Then, for the third part of a minute, hence;
	Some to kill cankers in the musk-rose buds,
	Some war with rere-mice for their leathern wings,
	To make my small elves coats, and some keep back
	The clamorous owl that nightly hoots and wonders
	At our quaint spirits. Sing me now asleep;
	Then to your offices and let me rest.

	[The Fairies sing]

	You spotted snakes with double tongue,
	Thorny hedgehogs, be not seen;
	Newts and blind-worms, do no wrong,
	Come not near our fairy queen.
	Philomel, with melody
	Sing in our sweet lullaby;
	Lulla, lulla, lullaby, lulla, lulla, lullaby:
	Never harm,
	Nor spell nor charm,
	Come our lovely lady nigh;
	So, good night, with lullaby.
	Weaving spiders, come not here;
	Hence, you long-legg'd spinners, hence!
	Beetles black, approach not near;
	Worm nor snail, do no offence.
	Philomel, with melody, &c.

Fairy	Hence, away! now all is well:
	One aloof stand sentinel.

	[Exeunt Fairies. TITANIA sleeps]

	[Enter OBERON and squeezes the flower on TITANIA's eyelids]

OBERON	What thou seest when thou dost wake,
	Do it for thy true-love take,
	Love and languish for his sake:
	Be it ounce, or cat, or bear,
	Pard, or boar with bristled hair,
	In thy eye that shall appear
	When thou wakest, it is thy dear:
	Wake when some vile thing is near.

	[Exit]

	[Enter LYSANDER and HERMIA]

LYSANDER	Fair love, you faint with wandering in the wood;
	And to speak troth, I have forgot our way:
	We'll rest us, Hermia, if you think it good,
	And tarry for the comfort of the day.

HERMIA	Be it so, Lysander: find you out a bed;
	For I upon this bank will rest my head.

LYSANDER	One turf shall serve as pillow for us both;
	One heart, one bed, two bosoms and one troth.

HERMIA	Nay, good Lysander; for my sake, my dear,
	Lie further off yet, do not lie so near.

LYSANDER	O, take the sense, sweet, of my innocence!
	Love takes the meaning in love's conference.
	I mean, that my heart unto yours is knit
	So that but one heart we can make of it;
	Two bosoms interchained with an oath;
	So then two bosoms and a single troth.
	Then by your side no bed-room me deny;
	For lying so, Hermia, I do not lie.

HERMIA	Lysander riddles very prettily:
	Now much beshrew my manners and my pride,
	If Hermia meant to say Lysander lied.
	But, gentle friend, for love and courtesy
	Lie further off; in human modesty,
	Such separation as may well be said
	Becomes a virtuous bachelor and a maid,
	So far be distant; and, good night, sweet friend:
	Thy love ne'er alter till thy sweet life end!

LYSANDER	Amen, amen, to that fair prayer, say I;
	And then end life when I end loyalty!
	Here is my bed: sleep give thee all his rest!

HERMIA	With half that wish the wisher's eyes be press'd!

	[They sleep]

	[Enter PUCK]

PUCK	Through the forest have I gone.
	But Athenian found I none,
	On whose eyes I might approve
	This flower's force in stirring love.
	Night and silence.--Who is here?
	Weeds of Athens he doth wear:
	This is he, my master said,
	Despised the Athenian maid;
	And here the maiden, sleeping sound,
	On the dank and dirty ground.
	Pretty soul! she durst not lie
	Near this lack-love, this kill-courtesy.
	Churl, upon thy eyes I throw
	All the power this charm doth owe.
	When thou wakest, let love forbid
	Sleep his seat on thy eyelid:
	So awake when I am gone;
	For I must now to Oberon.

	[Exit]

	[Enter DEMETRIUS and HELENA, running]

HELENA	Stay, though thou kill me, sweet Demetrius.

DEMETRIUS	I charge thee, hence, and do not haunt me thus.

HELENA	O, wilt thou darkling leave me? do not so.

DEMETRIUS	Stay, on thy peril: I alone will go.

	[Exit]

HELENA	O, I am out of breath in this fond chase!
	The more my prayer, the lesser is my grace.
	Happy is Hermia, wheresoe'er she lies;
	For she hath blessed and attractive eyes.
	How came her eyes so bright? Not with salt tears:
	If so, my eyes are oftener wash'd than hers.
	No, no, I am as ugly as a bear;
	For beasts that meet me run away for fear:
	Therefore no marvel though Demetrius
	Do, as a monster fly my presence thus.
	What wicked and dissembling glass of mine
	Made me compare with Hermia's sphery eyne?
	But who is here? Lysander! on the ground!
	Dead? or asleep? I see no blood, no wound.
	Lysander if you live, good sir, awake.

LYSANDER	[Awaking]  And run through fire I will for thy sweet sake.
	Transparent Helena! Nature shows art,
	That through thy bosom makes me see thy heart.
	Where is Demetrius? O, how fit a word
	Is that vile name to perish on my sword!

HELENA	Do not say so, Lysander; say not so
	What though he love your Hermia? Lord, what though?
	Yet Hermia still loves you: then be content.

LYSANDER	Content with Hermia! No; I do repent
	The tedious minutes I with her have spent.
	Not Hermia but Helena I love:
	Who will not change a raven for a dove?
	The will of man is by his reason sway'd;
	And reason says you are the worthier maid.
	Things growing are not ripe until their season
	So I, being young, till now ripe not to reason;
	And touching now the point of human skill,
	Reason becomes the marshal to my will
	And leads me to your eyes, where I o'erlook
	Love's stories written in love's richest book.

HELENA	Wherefore was I to this keen mockery born?
	When at your hands did I deserve this scorn?
	Is't not enough, is't not enough, young man,
	That I did never, no, nor never can,
	Deserve a sweet look from Demetrius' eye,
	But you must flout my insufficiency?
	Good troth, you do me wrong, good sooth, you do,
	In such disdainful manner me to woo.
	But fare you well: perforce I must confess
	I thought you lord of more true gentleness.
	O, that a lady, of one man refused.
	Should of another therefore be abused!

	[Exit]

LYSANDER	She sees not Hermia. Hermia, sleep thou there:
	And never mayst thou come Lysander near!
	For as a surfeit of the sweetest things
	The deepest loathing to the stomach brings,
	Or as tie heresies that men do leave
	Are hated most of those they did deceive,
	So thou, my surfeit and my heresy,
	Of all be hated, but the most of me!
	And, all my powers, address your love and might
	To honour Helen and to be her knight!

	[Exit]

HERMIA	[Awaking]  Help me, Lysander, help me! do thy best
	To pluck this crawling serpent from my breast!
	Ay me, for pity! what a dream was here!
	Lysander, look how I do quake with fear:
	Methought a serpent eat my heart away,
	And you sat smiling at his cruel pray.
	Lysander! what, removed? Lysander! lord!
	What, out of hearing? gone? no sound, no word?
	Alack, where are you speak, an if you hear;
	Speak, of all loves! I swoon almost with fear.
	No? then I well perceive you all not nigh
	Either death or you I'll find immediately.

	[Exit]




	A MIDSUMMER NIGHT'S DREAM


ACT III



SCENE I	The wood. TITANIA lying asleep.


	[Enter QUINCE, SNUG, BOTTOM, FLUTE, SNOUT, and
	STARVELING]

BOTTOM	Are we all met?

QUINCE	Pat, pat; and here's a marvellous convenient place
	for our rehearsal. This green plot shall be our
	stage, this hawthorn-brake our tiring-house; and we
	will do it in action as we will do it before the duke.

BOTTOM	Peter Quince,--

QUINCE	What sayest thou, bully Bottom?

BOTTOM	There are things in this comedy of Pyramus and
	Thisby that will never please. First, Pyramus must
	draw a sword to kill himself; which the ladies
	cannot abide. How answer you that?

SNOUT	By'r lakin, a parlous fear.

STARVELING	I believe we must leave the killing out, when all is done.

BOTTOM	Not a whit: I have a device to make all well.
	Write me a prologue; and let the prologue seem to
	say, we will do no harm with our swords, and that
	Pyramus is not killed indeed; and, for the more
	better assurance, tell them that I, Pyramus, am not
	Pyramus, but Bottom the weaver: this will put them
	out of fear.

QUINCE	Well, we will have such a prologue; and it shall be
	written in eight and six.

BOTTOM	No, make it two more; let it be written in eight and eight.

SNOUT	Will not the ladies be afeard of the lion?

STARVELING	I fear it, I promise you.

BOTTOM	Masters, you ought to consider with yourselves: to
	bring in--God shield us!--a lion among ladies, is a
	most dreadful thing; for there is not a more fearful
	wild-fowl than your lion living; and we ought to
	look to 't.

SNOUT	Therefore another prologue must tell he is not a lion.

BOTTOM	Nay, you must name his name, and half his face must
	be seen through the lion's neck: and he himself
	must speak through, saying thus, or to the same
	defect,--'Ladies,'--or 'Fair-ladies--I would wish
	You,'--or 'I would request you,'--or 'I would
	entreat you,--not to fear, not to tremble: my life
	for yours. If you think I come hither as a lion, it
	were pity of my life: no I am no such thing; I am a
	man as other men are;' and there indeed let him name
	his name, and tell them plainly he is Snug the joiner.

QUINCE	Well it shall be so. But there is two hard things;
	that is, to bring the moonlight into a chamber; for,
	you know, Pyramus and Thisby meet by moonlight.

SNOUT	Doth the moon shine that night we play our play?

BOTTOM	A calendar, a calendar! look in the almanac; find
	out moonshine, find out moonshine.

QUINCE	Yes, it doth shine that night.

BOTTOM	Why, then may you leave a casement of the great
	chamber window, where we play, open, and the moon
	may shine in at the casement.

QUINCE	Ay; or else one must come in with a bush of thorns
	and a lanthorn, and say he comes to disfigure, or to
	present, the person of Moonshine. Then, there is
	another thing: we must have a wall in the great
	chamber; for Pyramus and Thisby says the story, did
	talk through the chink of a wall.

SNOUT	You can never bring in a wall. What say you, Bottom?

BOTTOM	Some man or other must present Wall: and let him
	have some plaster, or some loam, or some rough-cast
	about him, to signify wall; and let him hold his
	fingers thus, and through that cranny shall Pyramus
	and Thisby whisper.

QUINCE	If that may be, then all is well. Come, sit down,
	every mother's son, and rehearse your parts.
	Pyramus, you begin: when you have spoken your
	speech, enter into that brake: and so every one
	according to his cue.

	[Enter PUCK behind]

PUCK	What hempen home-spuns have we swaggering here,
	So near the cradle of the fairy queen?
	What, a play toward! I'll be an auditor;
	An actor too, perhaps, if I see cause.

QUINCE	Speak, Pyramus. Thisby, stand forth.

BOTTOM	Thisby, the flowers of odious savours sweet,--

QUINCE	Odours, odours.

BOTTOM	--odours savours sweet:
	So hath thy breath, my dearest Thisby dear.
	But hark, a voice! stay thou but here awhile,
	And by and by I will to thee appear.

	[Exit]

PUCK	A stranger Pyramus than e'er played here.

	[Exit]

FLUTE	Must I speak now?

QUINCE	Ay, marry, must you; for you must understand he goes
	but to see a noise that he heard, and is to come again.

FLUTE	Most radiant Pyramus, most lily-white of hue,
	Of colour like the red rose on triumphant brier,
	Most brisky juvenal and eke most lovely Jew,
	As true as truest horse that yet would never tire,
	I'll meet thee, Pyramus, at Ninny's tomb.

QUINCE	'Ninus' tomb,' man: why, you must not speak that
	yet; that you answer to Pyramus: you speak all your
	part at once, cues and all Pyramus enter: your cue
	is past; it is, 'never tire.'

FLUTE	O,--As true as truest horse, that yet would
	never tire.

	[Re-enter PUCK, and BOTTOM with an ass's head]

BOTTOM	If I were fair, Thisby, I were only thine.

QUINCE	O monstrous! O strange! we are haunted. Pray,
	masters! fly, masters! Help!

	[Exeunt QUINCE, SNUG, FLUTE, SNOUT, and STARVELING]

PUCK	I'll follow you, I'll lead you about a round,
	Through bog, through bush, through brake, through brier:
	Sometime a horse I'll be, sometime a hound,
	A hog, a headless bear, sometime a fire;
	And neigh, and bark, and grunt, and roar, and burn,
	Like horse, hound, hog, bear, fire, at every turn.

	[Exit]

BOTTOM	Why do they run away? this is a knavery of them to
	make me afeard.

	[Re-enter SNOUT]

SNOUT	O Bottom, thou art changed! what do I see on thee?

BOTTOM	What do you see? you see an asshead of your own, do
	you?

	[Exit SNOUT]

	[Re-enter QUINCE]

QUINCE	Bless thee, Bottom! bless thee! thou art
	translated.

	[Exit]

BOTTOM	I see their knavery: this is to make an ass of me;
	to fright me, if they could. But I will not stir
	from this place, do what they can: I will walk up
	and down here, and I will sing, that they shall hear
	I am not afraid.

	[Sings]

	The ousel cock so black of hue,
	With orange-tawny bill,
	The throstle with his note so true,
	The wren with little quill,--

TITANIA	[Awaking]  What angel wakes me from my flowery bed?

BOTTOM	[Sings]

	The finch, the sparrow and the lark,
	The plain-song cuckoo gray,
	Whose note full many a man doth mark,
	And dares not answer nay;--
	for, indeed, who would set his wit to so foolish
	a bird? who would give a bird the lie, though he cry
	'cuckoo' never so?

TITANIA	I pray thee, gentle mortal, sing again:
	Mine ear is much enamour'd of thy note;
	So is mine eye enthralled to thy shape;
	And thy fair virtue's force perforce doth move me
	On the first view to say, to swear, I love thee.

BOTTOM	Methinks, mistress, you should have little reason
	for that: and yet, to say the truth, reason and
	love keep little company together now-a-days; the
	more the pity that some honest neighbours will not
	make them friends. Nay, I can gleek upon occasion.

TITANIA	Thou art as wise as thou art beautiful.

BOTTOM	Not so, neither: but if I had wit enough to get out
	of this wood, I have enough to serve mine own turn.

TITANIA	Out of this wood do not desire to go:
	Thou shalt remain here, whether thou wilt or no.
	I am a spirit of no common rate;
	The summer still doth tend upon my state;
	And I do love thee: therefore, go with me;
	I'll give thee fairies to attend on thee,
	And they shall fetch thee jewels from the deep,
	And sing while thou on pressed flowers dost sleep;
	And I will purge thy mortal grossness so
	That thou shalt like an airy spirit go.
	Peaseblossom! Cobweb! Moth! and Mustardseed!

	[Enter PEASEBLOSSOM, COBWEB, MOTH, and MUSTARDSEED]

PEASEBLOSSOM	Ready.

COBWEB	     And I.

MOTH	          And I.

MUSTARDSEED	                  And I.

ALL	Where shall we go?

TITANIA	Be kind and courteous to this gentleman;
	Hop in his walks and gambol in his eyes;
	Feed him with apricocks and dewberries,
	With purple grapes, green figs, and mulberries;
	The honey-bags steal from the humble-bees,
	And for night-tapers crop their waxen thighs
	And light them at the fiery glow-worm's eyes,
	To have my love to bed and to arise;
	And pluck the wings from Painted butterflies
	To fan the moonbeams from his sleeping eyes:
	Nod to him, elves, and do him courtesies.

PEASEBLOSSOM	Hail, mortal!

COBWEB	Hail!

MOTH	Hail!

MUSTARDSEED	Hail!

BOTTOM	I cry your worship's mercy, heartily: I beseech your
	worship's name.

COBWEB	Cobweb.

BOTTOM	I shall desire you of more acquaintance, good Master
	Cobweb: if I cut my finger, I shall make bold with
	you. Your name, honest gentleman?

PEASEBLOSSOM	Peaseblossom.

BOTTOM	I pray you, commend me to Mistress Squash, your
	mother, and to Master Peascod, your father. Good
	Master Peaseblossom, I shall desire you of more
	acquaintance too. Your name, I beseech you, sir?

MUSTARDSEED	Mustardseed.

BOTTOM	Good Master Mustardseed, I know your patience well:
	that same cowardly, giant-like ox-beef hath
	devoured many a gentleman of your house: I promise
	you your kindred had made my eyes water ere now. I
	desire your more acquaintance, good Master
	Mustardseed.

TITANIA	Come, wait upon him; lead him to my bower.
	The moon methinks looks with a watery eye;
	And when she weeps, weeps every little flower,
	Lamenting some enforced chastity.
	Tie up my love's tongue bring him silently.

	[Exeunt]




	A MIDSUMMER NIGHT'S DREAM


ACT III



SCENE II	Another part of the wood.


	[Enter OBERON]

OBERON	I wonder if Titania be awaked;
	Then, what it was that next came in her eye,
	Which she must dote on in extremity.

	[Enter PUCK]

	Here comes my messenger.
		   How now, mad spirit!
	What night-rule now about this haunted grove?

PUCK	My mistress with a monster is in love.
	Near to her close and consecrated bower,
	While she was in her dull and sleeping hour,
	A crew of patches, rude mechanicals,
	That work for bread upon Athenian stalls,
	Were met together to rehearse a play
	Intended for great Theseus' nuptial-day.
	The shallowest thick-skin of that barren sort,
	Who Pyramus presented, in their sport
	Forsook his scene and enter'd in a brake
	When I did him at this advantage take,
	An ass's nole I fixed on his head:
	Anon his Thisbe must be answered,
	And forth my mimic comes. When they him spy,
	As wild geese that the creeping fowler eye,
	Or russet-pated choughs, many in sort,
	Rising and cawing at the gun's report,
	Sever themselves and madly sweep the sky,
	So, at his sight, away his fellows fly;
	And, at our stamp, here o'er and o'er one falls;
	He murder cries and help from Athens calls.
	Their sense thus weak, lost with their fears
	thus strong,
	Made senseless things begin to do them wrong;
	For briers and thorns at their apparel snatch;
	Some sleeves, some hats, from yielders all
	things catch.
	I led them on in this distracted fear,
	And left sweet Pyramus translated there:
	When in that moment, so it came to pass,
	Titania waked and straightway loved an ass.

OBERON	This falls out better than I could devise.
	But hast thou yet latch'd the Athenian's eyes
	With the love-juice, as I did bid thee do?

PUCK	I took him sleeping,--that is finish'd too,--
	And the Athenian woman by his side:
	That, when he waked, of force she must be eyed.

	[Enter HERMIA and DEMETRIUS]

OBERON	Stand close: this is the same Athenian.

PUCK	This is the woman, but not this the man.

DEMETRIUS	O, why rebuke you him that loves you so?
	Lay breath so bitter on your bitter foe.

HERMIA	Now I but chide; but I should use thee worse,
	For thou, I fear, hast given me cause to curse,
	If thou hast slain Lysander in his sleep,
	Being o'er shoes in blood, plunge in the deep,
	And kill me too.
	The sun was not so true unto the day
	As he to me: would he have stolen away
	From sleeping Hermia? I'll believe as soon
	This whole earth may be bored and that the moon
	May through the centre creep and so displease
	Her brother's noontide with Antipodes.
	It cannot be but thou hast murder'd him;
	So should a murderer look, so dead, so grim.

DEMETRIUS	So should the murder'd look, and so should I,
	Pierced through the heart with your stern cruelty:
	Yet you, the murderer, look as bright, as clear,
	As yonder Venus in her glimmering sphere.

HERMIA	What's this to my Lysander? where is he?
	Ah, good Demetrius, wilt thou give him me?

DEMETRIUS	I had rather give his carcass to my hounds.

HERMIA	Out, dog! out, cur! thou drivest me past the bounds
	Of maiden's patience. Hast thou slain him, then?
	Henceforth be never number'd among men!
	O, once tell true, tell true, even for my sake!
	Durst thou have look'd upon him being awake,
	And hast thou kill'd him sleeping? O brave touch!
	Could not a worm, an adder, do so much?
	An adder did it; for with doubler tongue
	Than thine, thou serpent, never adder stung.

DEMETRIUS	You spend your passion on a misprised mood:
	I am not guilty of Lysander's blood;
	Nor is he dead, for aught that I can tell.

HERMIA	I pray thee, tell me then that he is well.

DEMETRIUS	An if I could, what should I get therefore?

HERMIA	A privilege never to see me more.
	And from thy hated presence part I so:
	See me no more, whether he be dead or no.

	[Exit]

DEMETRIUS	There is no following her in this fierce vein:
	Here therefore for a while I will remain.
	So sorrow's heaviness doth heavier grow
	For debt that bankrupt sleep doth sorrow owe:
	Which now in some slight measure it will pay,
	If for his tender here I make some stay.

	[Lies down and sleeps]

OBERON	What hast thou done? thou hast mistaken quite
	And laid the love-juice on some true-love's sight:
	Of thy misprision must perforce ensue
	Some true love turn'd and not a false turn'd true.

PUCK	Then fate o'er-rules, that, one man holding troth,
	A million fail, confounding oath on oath.

OBERON	About the wood go swifter than the wind,
	And Helena of Athens look thou find:
	All fancy-sick she is and pale of cheer,
	With sighs of love, that costs the fresh blood dear:
	By some illusion see thou bring her here:
	I'll charm his eyes against she do appear.

PUCK	I go, I go; look how I go,
	Swifter than arrow from the Tartar's bow.

	[Exit]

OBERON	   Flower of this purple dye,
	Hit with Cupid's archery,
	Sink in apple of his eye.
	When his love he doth espy,
	Let her shine as gloriously
	As the Venus of the sky.
	When thou wakest, if she be by,
	Beg of her for remedy.

	[Re-enter PUCK]

PUCK	   Captain of our fairy band,
	Helena is here at hand;
	And the youth, mistook by me,
	Pleading for a lover's fee.
	Shall we their fond pageant see?
	Lord, what fools these mortals be!

OBERON	Stand aside: the noise they make
	Will cause Demetrius to awake.

PUCK	Then will two at once woo one;
	That must needs be sport alone;
	And those things do best please me
	That befal preposterously.

	[Enter LYSANDER and HELENA]

LYSANDER	Why should you think that I should woo in scorn?
	Scorn and derision never come in tears:
	Look, when I vow, I weep; and vows so born,
	In their nativity all truth appears.
	How can these things in me seem scorn to you,
	Bearing the badge of faith, to prove them true?

HELENA	You do advance your cunning more and more.
	When truth kills truth, O devilish-holy fray!
	These vows are Hermia's: will you give her o'er?
	Weigh oath with oath, and you will nothing weigh:
	Your vows to her and me, put in two scales,
	Will even weigh, and both as light as tales.

LYSANDER	I had no judgment when to her I swore.

HELENA	Nor none, in my mind, now you give her o'er.

LYSANDER	Demetrius loves her, and he loves not you.

DEMETRIUS	[Awaking]  O Helena, goddess, nymph, perfect, divine!
	To what, my love, shall I compare thine eyne?
	Crystal is muddy. O, how ripe in show
	Thy lips, those kissing cherries, tempting grow!
	That pure congealed white, high Taurus snow,
	Fann'd with the eastern wind, turns to a crow
	When thou hold'st up thy hand: O, let me kiss
	This princess of pure white, this seal of bliss!

HELENA	O spite! O hell! I see you all are bent
	To set against me for your merriment:
	If you we re civil and knew courtesy,
	You would not do me thus much injury.
	Can you not hate me, as I know you do,
	But you must join in souls to mock me too?
	If you were men, as men you are in show,
	You would not use a gentle lady so;
	To vow, and swear, and superpraise my parts,
	When I am sure you hate me with your hearts.
	You both are rivals, and love Hermia;
	And now both rivals, to mock Helena:
	A trim exploit, a manly enterprise,
	To conjure tears up in a poor maid's eyes
	With your derision! none of noble sort
	Would so offend a virgin, and extort
	A poor soul's patience, all to make you sport.

LYSANDER	You are unkind, Demetrius; be not so;
	For you love Hermia; this you know I know:
	And here, with all good will, with all my heart,
	In Hermia's love I yield you up my part;
	And yours of Helena to me bequeath,
	Whom I do love and will do till my death.

HELENA	Never did mockers waste more idle breath.

DEMETRIUS	Lysander, keep thy Hermia; I will none:
	If e'er I loved her, all that love is gone.
	My heart to her but as guest-wise sojourn'd,
	And now to Helen is it home return'd,
	There to remain.

LYSANDER	                  Helen, it is not so.

DEMETRIUS	Disparage not the faith thou dost not know,
	Lest, to thy peril, thou aby it dear.
	Look, where thy love comes; yonder is thy dear.

	[Re-enter HERMIA]

HERMIA	Dark night, that from the eye his function takes,
	The ear more quick of apprehension makes;
	Wherein it doth impair the seeing sense,
	It pays the hearing double recompense.
	Thou art not by mine eye, Lysander, found;
	Mine ear, I thank it, brought me to thy sound
	But why unkindly didst thou leave me so?

LYSANDER	Why should he stay, whom love doth press to go?

HERMIA	What love could press Lysander from my side?

LYSANDER	Lysander's love, that would not let him bide,
	Fair Helena, who more engilds the night
	Than all you fiery oes and eyes of light.
	Why seek'st thou me? could not this make thee know,
	The hate I bear thee made me leave thee so?

HERMIA	You speak not as you think: it cannot be.

HELENA	Lo, she is one of this confederacy!
	Now I perceive they have conjoin'd all three
	To fashion this false sport, in spite of me.
	Injurious Hermia! most ungrateful maid!
	Have you conspired, have you with these contrived
	To bait me with this foul derision?
	Is all the counsel that we two have shared,
	The sisters' vows, the hours that we have spent,
	When we have chid the hasty-footed time
	For parting us,--O, is it all forgot?
	All school-days' friendship, childhood innocence?
	We, Hermia, like two artificial gods,
	Have with our needles created both one flower,
	Both on one sampler, sitting on one cushion,
	Both warbling of one song, both in one key,
	As if our hands, our sides, voices and minds,
	Had been incorporate. So we grow together,
	Like to a double cherry, seeming parted,
	But yet an union in partition;
	Two lovely berries moulded on one stem;
	So, with two seeming bodies, but one heart;
	Two of the first, like coats in heraldry,
	Due but to one and crowned with one crest.
	And will you rent our ancient love asunder,
	To join with men in scorning your poor friend?
	It is not friendly, 'tis not maidenly:
	Our sex, as well as I, may chide you for it,
	Though I alone do feel the injury.

HERMIA	I am amazed at your passionate words.
	I scorn you not: it seems that you scorn me.

HELENA	Have you not set Lysander, as in scorn,
	To follow me and praise my eyes and face?
	And made your other love, Demetrius,
	Who even but now did spurn me with his foot,
	To call me goddess, nymph, divine and rare,
	Precious, celestial? Wherefore speaks he this
	To her he hates? and wherefore doth Lysander
	Deny your love, so rich within his soul,
	And tender me, forsooth, affection,
	But by your setting on, by your consent?
	What thought I be not so in grace as you,
	So hung upon with love, so fortunate,
	But miserable most, to love unloved?
	This you should pity rather than despise.

HERNIA	I understand not what you mean by this.

HELENA	Ay, do, persever, counterfeit sad looks,
	Make mouths upon me when I turn my back;
	Wink each at other; hold the sweet jest up:
	This sport, well carried, shall be chronicled.
	If you have any pity, grace, or manners,
	You would not make me such an argument.
	But fare ye well: 'tis partly my own fault;
	Which death or absence soon shall remedy.

LYSANDER	Stay, gentle Helena; hear my excuse:
	My love, my life my soul, fair Helena!

HELENA	O excellent!

HERMIA	                  Sweet, do not scorn her so.

DEMETRIUS	If she cannot entreat, I can compel.

LYSANDER	Thou canst compel no more than she entreat:
	Thy threats have no more strength than her weak prayers.
	Helen, I love thee; by my life, I do:
	I swear by that which I will lose for thee,
	To prove him false that says I love thee not.

DEMETRIUS	I say I love thee more than he can do.

LYSANDER	If thou say so, withdraw, and prove it too.

DEMETRIUS	Quick, come!

HERMIA	Lysander, whereto tends all this?

LYSANDER	Away, you Ethiope!

DEMETRIUS	                  No, no; he'll [        ]
	Seem to break loose; take on as you would follow,
	But yet come not: you are a tame man, go!

LYSANDER	Hang off, thou cat, thou burr! vile thing, let loose,
	Or I will shake thee from me like a serpent!

HERMIA	Why are you grown so rude? what change is this?
	Sweet love,--

LYSANDER	Thy love! out, tawny Tartar, out!
	Out, loathed medicine! hated potion, hence!

HERMIA	Do you not jest?

HELENA	Yes, sooth; and so do you.

LYSANDER	Demetrius, I will keep my word with thee.

DEMETRIUS	I would I had your bond, for I perceive
	A weak bond holds you: I'll not trust your word.

LYSANDER	What, should I hurt her, strike her, kill her dead?
	Although I hate her, I'll not harm her so.

HERMIA	What, can you do me greater harm than hate?
	Hate me! wherefore? O me! what news, my love!
	Am not I Hermia? are not you Lysander?
	I am as fair now as I was erewhile.
	Since night you loved me; yet since night you left
	me:
	Why, then you left me--O, the gods forbid!--
	In earnest, shall I say?

LYSANDER	Ay, by my life;
	And never did desire to see thee more.
	Therefore be out of hope, of question, of doubt;
	Be certain, nothing truer; 'tis no jest
	That I do hate thee and love Helena.

HERMIA	O me! you juggler! you canker-blossom!
	You thief of love! what, have you come by night
	And stolen my love's heart from him?

HELENA	Fine, i'faith!
	Have you no modesty, no maiden shame,
	No touch of bashfulness? What, will you tear
	Impatient answers from my gentle tongue?
	Fie, fie! you counterfeit, you puppet, you!

HERMIA	Puppet? why so? ay, that way goes the game.
	Now I perceive that she hath made compare
	Between our statures; she hath urged her height;
	And with her personage, her tall personage,
	Her height, forsooth, she hath prevail'd with him.
	And are you grown so high in his esteem;
	Because I am so dwarfish and so low?
	How low am I, thou painted maypole? speak;
	How low am I? I am not yet so low
	But that my nails can reach unto thine eyes.

HELENA	I pray you, though you mock me, gentlemen,
	Let her not hurt me: I was never curst;
	I have no gift at all in shrewishness;
	I am a right maid for my cowardice:
	Let her not strike me. You perhaps may think,
	Because she is something lower than myself,
	That I can match her.

HERMIA	Lower! hark, again.

HELENA	Good Hermia, do not be so bitter with me.
	I evermore did love you, Hermia,
	Did ever keep your counsels, never wrong'd you;
	Save that, in love unto Demetrius,
	I told him of your stealth unto this wood.
	He follow'd you; for love I follow'd him;
	But he hath chid me hence and threaten'd me
	To strike me, spurn me, nay, to kill me too:
	And now, so you will let me quiet go,
	To Athens will I bear my folly back
	And follow you no further: let me go:
	You see how simple and how fond I am.

HERMIA	Why, get you gone: who is't that hinders you?

HELENA	A foolish heart, that I leave here behind.

HERMIA	What, with Lysander?

HELENA	With Demetrius.

LYSANDER	Be not afraid; she shall not harm thee, Helena.

DEMETRIUS	No, sir, she shall not, though you take her part.

HELENA	O, when she's angry, she is keen and shrewd!
	She was a vixen when she went to school;
	And though she be but little, she is fierce.

HERMIA	'Little' again! nothing but 'low' and 'little'!
	Why will you suffer her to flout me thus?
	Let me come to her.

LYSANDER	Get you gone, you dwarf;
	You minimus, of hindering knot-grass made;
	You bead, you acorn.

DEMETRIUS	You are too officious
	In her behalf that scorns your services.
	Let her alone: speak not of Helena;
	Take not her part; for, if thou dost intend
	Never so little show of love to her,
	Thou shalt aby it.

LYSANDER	                  Now she holds me not;
	Now follow, if thou darest, to try whose right,
	Of thine or mine, is most in Helena.

DEMETRIUS	Follow! nay, I'll go with thee, cheek by jole.

	[Exeunt LYSANDER and DEMETRIUS]

HERMIA	You, mistress, all this coil is 'long of you:
	Nay, go not back.

HELENA	                  I will not trust you, I,
	Nor longer stay in your curst company.
	Your hands than mine are quicker for a fray,
	My legs are longer though, to run away.

	[Exit]

HERMIA	I am amazed, and know not what to say.

	[Exit]

OBERON	This is thy negligence: still thou mistakest,
	Or else committ'st thy knaveries wilfully.

PUCK	Believe me, king of shadows, I mistook.
	Did not you tell me I should know the man
	By the Athenian garment be had on?
	And so far blameless proves my enterprise,
	That I have 'nointed an Athenian's eyes;
	And so far am I glad it so did sort
	As this their jangling I esteem a sport.

OBERON	Thou see'st these lovers seek a place to fight:
	Hie therefore, Robin, overcast the night;
	The starry welkin cover thou anon
	With drooping fog as black as Acheron,
	And lead these testy rivals so astray
	As one come not within another's way.
	Like to Lysander sometime frame thy tongue,
	Then stir Demetrius up with bitter wrong;
	And sometime rail thou like Demetrius;
	And from each other look thou lead them thus,
	Till o'er their brows death-counterfeiting sleep
	With leaden legs and batty wings doth creep:
	Then crush this herb into Lysander's eye;
	Whose liquor hath this virtuous property,
	To take from thence all error with his might,
	And make his eyeballs roll with wonted sight.
	When they next wake, all this derision
	Shall seem a dream and fruitless vision,
	And back to Athens shall the lovers wend,
	With league whose date till death shall never end.
	Whiles I in this affair do thee employ,
	I'll to my queen and beg her Indian boy;
	And then I will her charmed eye release
	From monster's view, and all things shall be peace.

PUCK	My fairy lord, this must be done with haste,
	For night's swift dragons cut the clouds full fast,
	And yonder shines Aurora's harbinger;
	At whose approach, ghosts, wandering here and there,
	Troop home to churchyards: damned spirits all,
	That in crossways and floods have burial,
	Already to their wormy beds are gone;
	For fear lest day should look their shames upon,
	They willfully themselves exile from light
	And must for aye consort with black-brow'd night.

OBERON	But we are spirits of another sort:
	I with the morning's love have oft made sport,
	And, like a forester, the groves may tread,
	Even till the eastern gate, all fiery-red,
	Opening on Neptune with fair blessed beams,
	Turns into yellow gold his salt green streams.
	But, notwithstanding, haste; make no delay:
	We may effect this business yet ere day.

	[Exit]

PUCK	   Up and down, up and down,
	I will lead them up and down:
	I am fear'd in field and town:
	Goblin, lead them up and down.
	Here comes one.

	[Re-enter LYSANDER]

LYSANDER	Where art thou, proud Demetrius? speak thou now.

PUCK	Here, villain; drawn and ready. Where art thou?

LYSANDER	I will be with thee straight.

PUCK	Follow me, then,
	To plainer ground.

	[Exit LYSANDER, as following the voice]

	[Re-enter DEMETRIUS]

DEMETRIUS	                  Lysander! speak again:
	Thou runaway, thou coward, art thou fled?
	Speak! In some bush? Where dost thou hide thy head?

PUCK	Thou coward, art thou bragging to the stars,
	Telling the bushes that thou look'st for wars,
	And wilt not come? Come, recreant; come, thou child;
	I'll whip thee with a rod: he is defiled
	That draws a sword on thee.

DEMETRIUS	Yea, art thou there?

PUCK	Follow my voice: we'll try no manhood here.

	[Exeunt]

	[Re-enter LYSANDER]

LYSANDER	He goes before me and still dares me on:
	When I come where he calls, then he is gone.
	The villain is much lighter-heel'd than I:
	I follow'd fast, but faster he did fly;
	That fallen am I in dark uneven way,
	And here will rest me.

	[Lies down]

	Come, thou gentle day!
	For if but once thou show me thy grey light,
	I'll find Demetrius and revenge this spite.

	[Sleeps]

	[Re-enter PUCK and DEMETRIUS]

PUCK	Ho, ho, ho! Coward, why comest thou not?

DEMETRIUS	Abide me, if thou darest; for well I wot
	Thou runn'st before me, shifting every place,
	And darest not stand, nor look me in the face.
	Where art thou now?

PUCK	Come hither: I am here.

DEMETRIUS	Nay, then, thou mock'st me. Thou shalt buy this dear,
	If ever I thy face by daylight see:
	Now, go thy way. Faintness constraineth me
	To measure out my length on this cold bed.
	By day's approach look to be visited.

	[Lies down and sleeps]

	[Re-enter HELENA]

HELENA	O weary night, O long and tedious night,
	Abate thy hour! Shine comforts from the east,
	That I may back to Athens by daylight,
	From these that my poor company detest:
	And sleep, that sometimes shuts up sorrow's eye,
	Steal me awhile from mine own company.

	[Lies down and sleeps]

PUCK	Yet but three? Come one more;
	Two of both kinds make up four.
	Here she comes, curst and sad:
	Cupid is a knavish lad,
	Thus to make poor females mad.

	[Re-enter HERMIA]

HERMIA	Never so weary, never so in woe,
	Bedabbled with the dew and torn with briers,
	I can no further crawl, no further go;
	My legs can keep no pace with my desires.
	Here will I rest me till the break of day.
	Heavens shield Lysander, if they mean a fray!

	[Lies down and sleeps]

PUCK	                  On the ground
	Sleep sound:
	I'll apply
	To your eye,
	Gentle lover, remedy.

	[Squeezing the juice on LYSANDER's eyes]

	When thou wakest,
	Thou takest
	True delight
	In the sight
	Of thy former lady's eye:
	And the country proverb known,
	That every man should take his own,
	In your waking shall be shown:
	Jack shall have Jill;
	Nought shall go ill;
	The man shall have his mare again, and all shall be well.

	[Exit]




	A MIDSUMMER NIGHT'S DREAM


ACT IV



SCENE I	The same. LYSANDER, DEMETRIUS, HELENA, and HERMIA
	lying asleep.


	[Enter TITANIA and BOTTOM; PEASEBLOSSOM, COBWEB, MOTH,
	MUSTARDSEED, and other Fairies attending; OBERON
	behind unseen]

TITANIA	Come, sit thee down upon this flowery bed,
	While I thy amiable cheeks do coy,
	And stick musk-roses in thy sleek smooth head,
	And kiss thy fair large ears, my gentle joy.

BOTTOM	Where's Peaseblossom?

PEASEBLOSSOM	Ready.

BOTTOM	Scratch my head Peaseblossom. Where's Mounsieur Cobweb?

COBWEB	Ready.

BOTTOM	Mounsieur Cobweb, good mounsieur, get you your
	weapons in your hand, and kill me a red-hipped
	humble-bee on the top of a thistle; and, good
	mounsieur, bring me the honey-bag. Do not fret
	yourself too much in the action, mounsieur; and,
	good mounsieur, have a care the honey-bag break not;
	I would be loath to have you overflown with a
	honey-bag, signior. Where's Mounsieur Mustardseed?

MUSTARDSEED	Ready.

BOTTOM	Give me your neaf, Mounsieur Mustardseed. Pray you,
	leave your courtesy, good mounsieur.

MUSTARDSEED	What's your Will?

BOTTOM	Nothing, good mounsieur, but to help Cavalery Cobweb
	to scratch. I must to the barber's, monsieur; for
	methinks I am marvellous hairy about the face; and I
	am such a tender ass, if my hair do but tickle me,
	I must scratch.

TITANIA	What, wilt thou hear some music,
	my sweet love?

BOTTOM	I have a reasonable good ear in music. Let's have
	the tongs and the bones.

TITANIA	Or say, sweet love, what thou desirest to eat.

BOTTOM	Truly, a peck of provender: I could munch your good
	dry oats. Methinks I have a great desire to a bottle
	of hay: good hay, sweet hay, hath no fellow.

TITANIA	I have a venturous fairy that shall seek
	The squirrel's hoard, and fetch thee new nuts.

BOTTOM	I had rather have a handful or two of dried peas.
	But, I pray you, let none of your people stir me: I
	have an exposition of sleep come upon me.

TITANIA	Sleep thou, and I will wind thee in my arms.
	Fairies, begone, and be all ways away.

	[Exeunt fairies]

	So doth the woodbine the sweet honeysuckle
	Gently entwist; the female ivy so
	Enrings the barky fingers of the elm.
	O, how I love thee! how I dote on thee!

	[They sleep]

	[Enter PUCK]

OBERON	[Advancing]  Welcome, good Robin.
	See'st thou this sweet sight?
	Her dotage now I do begin to pity:
	For, meeting her of late behind the wood,
	Seeking sweet favours from this hateful fool,
	I did upbraid her and fall out with her;
	For she his hairy temples then had rounded
	With a coronet of fresh and fragrant flowers;
	And that same dew, which sometime on the buds
	Was wont to swell like round and orient pearls,
	Stood now within the pretty flowerets' eyes
	Like tears that did their own disgrace bewail.
	When I had at my pleasure taunted her
	And she in mild terms begg'd my patience,
	I then did ask of her her changeling child;
	Which straight she gave me, and her fairy sent
	To bear him to my bower in fairy land.
	And now I have the boy, I will undo
	This hateful imperfection of her eyes:
	And, gentle Puck, take this transformed scalp
	From off the head of this Athenian swain;
	That, he awaking when the other do,
	May all to Athens back again repair
	And think no more of this night's accidents
	But as the fierce vexation of a dream.
	But first I will release the fairy queen.
	Be as thou wast wont to be;
	See as thou wast wont to see:
	Dian's bud o'er Cupid's flower
	Hath such force and blessed power.
	Now, my Titania; wake you, my sweet queen.

TITANIA	My Oberon! what visions have I seen!
	Methought I was enamour'd of an ass.

OBERON	There lies your love.

TITANIA	How came these things to pass?
	O, how mine eyes do loathe his visage now!

OBERON	Silence awhile. Robin, take off this head.
	Titania, music call; and strike more dead
	Than common sleep of all these five the sense.

TITANIA	Music, ho! music, such as charmeth sleep!

	[Music, still]

PUCK	Now, when thou wakest, with thine
	own fool's eyes peep.

OBERON	Sound, music! Come, my queen, take hands with me,
	And rock the ground whereon these sleepers be.
	Now thou and I are new in amity,
	And will to-morrow midnight solemnly
	Dance in Duke Theseus' house triumphantly,
	And bless it to all fair prosperity:
	There shall the pairs of faithful lovers be
	Wedded, with Theseus, all in jollity.

PUCK	Fairy king, attend, and mark:
	I do hear the morning lark.

OBERON	Then, my queen, in silence sad,
	Trip we after the night's shade:
	We the globe can compass soon,
	Swifter than the wandering moon.

TITANIA	Come, my lord, and in our flight
	Tell me how it came this night
	That I sleeping here was found
	With these mortals on the ground.

	[Exeunt]

	[Horns winded within]

	[Enter THESEUS, HIPPOLYTA, EGEUS, and train]

THESEUS	Go, one of you, find out the forester;
	For now our observation is perform'd;
	And since we have the vaward of the day,
	My love shall hear the music of my hounds.
	Uncouple in the western valley; let them go:
	Dispatch, I say, and find the forester.

	[Exit an Attendant]

	We will, fair queen, up to the mountain's top,
	And mark the musical confusion
	Of hounds and echo in conjunction.

HIPPOLYTA	I was with Hercules and Cadmus once,
	When in a wood of Crete they bay'd the bear
	With hounds of Sparta: never did I hear
	Such gallant chiding: for, besides the groves,
	The skies, the fountains, every region near
	Seem'd all one mutual cry: I never heard
	So musical a discord, such sweet thunder.

THESEUS	My hounds are bred out of the Spartan kind,
	So flew'd, so sanded, and their heads are hung
	With ears that sweep away the morning dew;
	Crook-knee'd, and dew-lapp'd like Thessalian bulls;
	Slow in pursuit, but match'd in mouth like bells,
	Each under each. A cry more tuneable
	Was never holla'd to, nor cheer'd with horn,
	In Crete, in Sparta, nor in Thessaly:
	Judge when you hear. But, soft! what nymphs are these?

EGEUS	My lord, this is my daughter here asleep;
	And this, Lysander; this Demetrius is;
	This Helena, old Nedar's Helena:
	I wonder of their being here together.

THESEUS	No doubt they rose up early to observe
	The rite of May, and hearing our intent,
	Came here in grace our solemnity.
	But speak, Egeus; is not this the day
	That Hermia should give answer of her choice?

EGEUS	It is, my lord.

THESEUS	Go, bid the huntsmen wake them with their horns.

	[Horns and shout within. LYSANDER, DEMETRIUS,
	HELENA, and HERMIA wake and start up]

	Good morrow, friends. Saint Valentine is past:
	Begin these wood-birds but to couple now?

LYSANDER	Pardon, my lord.

THESEUS	                  I pray you all, stand up.
	I know you two are rival enemies:
	How comes this gentle concord in the world,
	That hatred is so far from jealousy,
	To sleep by hate, and fear no enmity?

LYSANDER	My lord, I shall reply amazedly,
	Half sleep, half waking: but as yet, I swear,
	I cannot truly say how I came here;
	But, as I think,--for truly would I speak,
	And now do I bethink me, so it is,--
	I came with Hermia hither: our intent
	Was to be gone from Athens, where we might,
	Without the peril of the Athenian law.

EGEUS	Enough, enough, my lord; you have enough:
	I beg the law, the law, upon his head.
	They would have stolen away; they would, Demetrius,
	Thereby to have defeated you and me,
	You of your wife and me of my consent,
	Of my consent that she should be your wife.

DEMETRIUS	My lord, fair Helen told me of their stealth,
	Of this their purpose hither to this wood;
	And I in fury hither follow'd them,
	Fair Helena in fancy following me.
	But, my good lord, I wot not by what power,--
	But by some power it is,--my love to Hermia,
	Melted as the snow, seems to me now
	As the remembrance of an idle gaud
	Which in my childhood I did dote upon;
	And all the faith, the virtue of my heart,
	The object and the pleasure of mine eye,
	Is only Helena. To her, my lord,
	Was I betroth'd ere I saw Hermia:
	But, like in sickness, did I loathe this food;
	But, as in health, come to my natural taste,
	Now I do wish it, love it, long for it,
	And will for evermore be true to it.

THESEUS	Fair lovers, you are fortunately met:
	Of this discourse we more will hear anon.
	Egeus, I will overbear your will;
	For in the temple by and by with us
	These couples shall eternally be knit:
	And, for the morning now is something worn,
	Our purposed hunting shall be set aside.
	Away with us to Athens; three and three,
	We'll hold a feast in great solemnity.
	Come, Hippolyta.

	[Exeunt THESEUS, HIPPOLYTA, EGEUS, and train]

DEMETRIUS	These things seem small and undistinguishable,
HERMIA	Methinks I see these things with parted eye,
	When every thing seems double.

HELENA	So methinks:
	And I have found Demetrius like a jewel,
	Mine own, and not mine own.

DEMETRIUS	Are you sure
	That we are awake? It seems to me
	That yet we sleep, we dream. Do not you think
	The duke was here, and bid us follow him?

HERMIA	Yea; and my father.

HELENA	And Hippolyta.

LYSANDER	And he did bid us follow to the temple.

DEMETRIUS	Why, then, we are awake: let's follow him
	And by the way let us recount our dreams.

	[Exeunt]

BOTTOM	[Awaking]  When my cue comes, call me, and I will
	answer: my next is, 'Most fair Pyramus.' Heigh-ho!
	Peter Quince! Flute, the bellows-mender! Snout,
	the tinker! Starveling! God's my life, stolen
	hence, and left me asleep! I have had a most rare
	vision. I have had a dream, past the wit of man to
	say what dream it was: man is but an ass, if he go
	about to expound this dream. Methought I was--there
	is no man can tell what. Methought I was,--and
	methought I had,--but man is but a patched fool, if
	he will offer to say what methought I had. The eye
	of man hath not heard, the ear of man hath not
	seen, man's hand is not able to taste, his tongue
	to conceive, nor his heart to report, what my dream
	was. I will get Peter Quince to write a ballad of
	this dream: it shall be called Bottom's Dream,
	because it hath no bottom; and I will sing it in the
	latter end of a play, before the duke:
	peradventure, to make it the more gracious, I shall
	sing it at her death.

	[Exit]




	A MIDSUMMER NIGHT'S DREAM


ACT IV



SCENE II	Athens. QUINCE'S house.


	[Enter QUINCE, FLUTE, SNOUT, and STARVELING]

QUINCE	Have you sent to Bottom's house? is he come home yet?

STARVELING	He cannot be heard of. Out of doubt he is
	transported.

FLUTE	If he come not, then the play is marred: it goes
	not forward, doth it?

QUINCE	It is not possible: you have not a man in all
	Athens able to discharge Pyramus but he.

FLUTE	No, he hath simply the best wit of any handicraft
	man in Athens.

QUINCE	Yea and the best person too; and he is a very
	paramour for a sweet voice.

FLUTE	You must say 'paragon:' a paramour is, God bless us,
	a thing of naught.

	[Enter SNUG]

SNUG	Masters, the duke is coming from the temple, and
	there is two or three lords and ladies more married:
	if our sport had gone forward, we had all been made
	men.

FLUTE	O sweet bully Bottom! Thus hath he lost sixpence a
	day during his life; he could not have 'scaped
	sixpence a day: an the duke had not given him
	sixpence a day for playing Pyramus, I'll be hanged;
	he would have deserved it: sixpence a day in
	Pyramus, or nothing.

	[Enter BOTTOM]

BOTTOM	Where are these lads? where are these hearts?

QUINCE	Bottom! O most courageous day! O most happy hour!

BOTTOM	Masters, I am to discourse wonders: but ask me not
	what; for if I tell you, I am no true Athenian. I
	will tell you every thing, right as it fell out.

QUINCE	Let us hear, sweet Bottom.

BOTTOM	Not a word of me. All that I will tell you is, that
	the duke hath dined. Get your apparel together,
	good strings to your beards, new ribbons to your
	pumps; meet presently at the palace; every man look
	o'er his part; for the short and the long is, our
	play is preferred. In any case, let Thisby have
	clean linen; and let not him that plays the lion
	pair his nails, for they shall hang out for the
	lion's claws. And, most dear actors, eat no onions
	nor garlic, for we are to utter sweet breath; and I
	do not doubt but to hear them say, it is a sweet
	comedy. No more words: away! go, away!

	[Exeunt]




	A MIDSUMMER NIGHT'S DREAM


ACT V



SCENE I	Athens. The palace of THESEUS.


	[Enter THESEUS, HIPPOLYTA, PHILOSTRATE, Lords and
	Attendants]

HIPPOLYTA	'Tis strange my Theseus, that these
	lovers speak of.

THESEUS	More strange than true: I never may believe
	These antique fables, nor these fairy toys.
	Lovers and madmen have such seething brains,
	Such shaping fantasies, that apprehend
	More than cool reason ever comprehends.
	The lunatic, the lover and the poet
	Are of imagination all compact:
	One sees more devils than vast hell can hold,
	That is, the madman: the lover, all as frantic,
	Sees Helen's beauty in a brow of Egypt:
	The poet's eye, in fine frenzy rolling,
	Doth glance from heaven to earth, from earth to heaven;
	And as imagination bodies forth
	The forms of things unknown, the poet's pen
	Turns them to shapes and gives to airy nothing
	A local habitation and a name.
	Such tricks hath strong imagination,
	That if it would but apprehend some joy,
	It comprehends some bringer of that joy;
	Or in the night, imagining some fear,
	How easy is a bush supposed a bear!

HIPPOLYTA	But all the story of the night told over,
	And all their minds transfigured so together,
	More witnesseth than fancy's images
	And grows to something of great constancy;
	But, howsoever, strange and admirable.

THESEUS	Here come the lovers, full of joy and mirth.

	[Enter LYSANDER, DEMETRIUS, HERMIA, and HELENA]

	Joy, gentle friends! joy and fresh days of love
	Accompany your hearts!

LYSANDER	More than to us
	Wait in your royal walks, your board, your bed!

THESEUS	Come now; what masques, what dances shall we have,
	To wear away this long age of three hours
	Between our after-supper and bed-time?
	Where is our usual manager of mirth?
	What revels are in hand? Is there no play,
	To ease the anguish of a torturing hour?
	Call Philostrate.

PHILOSTRATE	                  Here, mighty Theseus.

THESEUS	Say, what abridgement have you for this evening?
	What masque? what music? How shall we beguile
	The lazy time, if not with some delight?

PHILOSTRATE	There is a brief how many sports are ripe:
	Make choice of which your highness will see first.

	[Giving a paper]

THESEUS	[Reads]  'The battle with the Centaurs, to be sung
	By an Athenian eunuch to the harp.'
	We'll none of that: that have I told my love,
	In glory of my kinsman Hercules.

	[Reads]

	'The riot of the tipsy Bacchanals,
	Tearing the Thracian singer in their rage.'
	That is an old device; and it was play'd
	When I from Thebes came last a conqueror.

	[Reads]

	'The thrice three Muses mourning for the death
	Of Learning, late deceased in beggary.'
	That is some satire, keen and critical,
	Not sorting with a nuptial ceremony.

	[Reads]

	'A tedious brief scene of young Pyramus
	And his love Thisbe; very tragical mirth.'
	Merry and tragical! tedious and brief!
	That is, hot ice and wondrous strange snow.
	How shall we find the concord of this discord?

PHILOSTRATE	A play there is, my lord, some ten words long,
	Which is as brief as I have known a play;
	But by ten words, my lord, it is too long,
	Which makes it tedious; for in all the play
	There is not one word apt, one player fitted:
	And tragical, my noble lord, it is;
	For Pyramus therein doth kill himself.
	Which, when I saw rehearsed, I must confess,
	Made mine eyes water; but more merry tears
	The passion of loud laughter never shed.

THESEUS	What are they that do play it?

PHILOSTRATE	Hard-handed men that work in Athens here,
	Which never labour'd in their minds till now,
	And now have toil'd their unbreathed memories
	With this same play, against your nuptial.

THESEUS	And we will hear it.

PHILOSTRATE	No, my noble lord;
	It is not for you: I have heard it over,
	And it is nothing, nothing in the world;
	Unless you can find sport in their intents,
	Extremely stretch'd and conn'd with cruel pain,
	To do you service.

THESEUS	                  I will hear that play;
	For never anything can be amiss,
	When simpleness and duty tender it.
	Go, bring them in: and take your places, ladies.

	[Exit PHILOSTRATE]

HIPPOLYTA	I love not to see wretchedness o'er charged
	And duty in his service perishing.

THESEUS	Why, gentle sweet, you shall see no such thing.

HIPPOLYTA	He says they can do nothing in this kind.

THESEUS	The kinder we, to give them thanks for nothing.
	Our sport shall be to take what they mistake:
	And what poor duty cannot do, noble respect
	Takes it in might, not merit.
	Where I have come, great clerks have purposed
	To greet me with premeditated welcomes;
	Where I have seen them shiver and look pale,
	Make periods in the midst of sentences,
	Throttle their practised accent in their fears
	And in conclusion dumbly have broke off,
	Not paying me a welcome. Trust me, sweet,
	Out of this silence yet I pick'd a welcome;
	And in the modesty of fearful duty
	I read as much as from the rattling tongue
	Of saucy and audacious eloquence.
	Love, therefore, and tongue-tied simplicity
	In least speak most, to my capacity.

	[Re-enter PHILOSTRATE]

PHILOSTRATE	So please your grace, the Prologue is address'd.

THESEUS	Let him approach.

	[Flourish of trumpets]

	[Enter QUINCE for the Prologue]

Prologue	If we offend, it is with our good will.
	That you should think, we come not to offend,
	But with good will. To show our simple skill,
	That is the true beginning of our end.
	Consider then we come but in despite.
	We do not come as minding to contest you,
	Our true intent is. All for your delight
	We are not here. That you should here repent you,
	The actors are at hand and by their show
	You shall know all that you are like to know.

THESEUS	This fellow doth not stand upon points.

LYSANDER	He hath rid his prologue like a rough colt; he knows
	not the stop. A good moral, my lord: it is not
	enough to speak, but to speak true.

HIPPOLYTA	Indeed he hath played on his prologue like a child
	on a recorder; a sound, but not in government.

THESEUS	His speech, was like a tangled chain; nothing
	impaired, but all disordered. Who is next?

	[Enter Pyramus and Thisbe, Wall, Moonshine, and Lion]

Prologue	Gentles, perchance you wonder at this show;
	But wonder on, till truth make all things plain.
	This man is Pyramus, if you would know;
	This beauteous lady Thisby is certain.
	This man, with lime and rough-cast, doth present
	Wall, that vile Wall which did these lovers sunder;
	And through Wall's chink, poor souls, they are content
	To whisper. At the which let no man wonder.
	This man, with lanthorn, dog, and bush of thorn,
	Presenteth Moonshine; for, if you will know,
	By moonshine did these lovers think no scorn
	To meet at Ninus' tomb, there, there to woo.
	This grisly beast, which Lion hight by name,
	The trusty Thisby, coming first by night,
	Did scare away, or rather did affright;
	And, as she fled, her mantle she did fall,
	Which Lion vile with bloody mouth did stain.
	Anon comes Pyramus, sweet youth and tall,
	And finds his trusty Thisby's mantle slain:
	Whereat, with blade, with bloody blameful blade,
	He bravely broach'd is boiling bloody breast;
	And Thisby, tarrying in mulberry shade,
	His dagger drew, and died. For all the rest,
	Let Lion, Moonshine, Wall, and lovers twain
	At large discourse, while here they do remain.

	[Exeunt Prologue, Thisbe, Lion, and Moonshine]

THESEUS	I wonder if the lion be to speak.

DEMETRIUS	No wonder, my lord: one lion may, when many asses do.

Wall	In this same interlude it doth befall
	That I, one Snout by name, present a wall;
	And such a wall, as I would have you think,
	That had in it a crannied hole or chink,
	Through which the lovers, Pyramus and Thisby,
	Did whisper often very secretly.
	This loam, this rough-cast and this stone doth show
	That I am that same wall; the truth is so:
	And this the cranny is, right and sinister,
	Through which the fearful lovers are to whisper.

THESEUS	Would you desire lime and hair to speak better?

DEMETRIUS	It is the wittiest partition that ever I heard
	discourse, my lord.

	[Enter Pyramus]

THESEUS	Pyramus draws near the wall: silence!

Pyramus	O grim-look'd night! O night with hue so black!
	O night, which ever art when day is not!
	O night, O night! alack, alack, alack,
	I fear my Thisby's promise is forgot!
	And thou, O wall, O sweet, O lovely wall,
	That stand'st between her father's ground and mine!
	Thou wall, O wall, O sweet and lovely wall,
	Show me thy chink, to blink through with mine eyne!

	[Wall holds up his fingers]

	Thanks, courteous wall: Jove shield thee well for this!
	But what see I? No Thisby do I see.
	O wicked wall, through whom I see no bliss!
	Cursed be thy stones for thus deceiving me!

THESEUS	The wall, methinks, being sensible, should curse again.

Pyramus	No, in truth, sir, he should not. 'Deceiving me'
	is Thisby's cue: she is to enter now, and I am to
	spy her through the wall. You shall see, it will
	fall pat as I told you. Yonder she comes.

	[Enter Thisbe]

Thisbe	O wall, full often hast thou heard my moans,
	For parting my fair Pyramus and me!
	My cherry lips have often kiss'd thy stones,
	Thy stones with lime and hair knit up in thee.

Pyramus	I see a voice: now will I to the chink,
	To spy an I can hear my Thisby's face. Thisby!

Thisbe	My love thou art, my love I think.

Pyramus	Think what thou wilt, I am thy lover's grace;
	And, like Limander, am I trusty still.

Thisbe	And I like Helen, till the Fates me kill.

Pyramus	Not Shafalus to Procrus was so true.

Thisbe	As Shafalus to Procrus, I to you.

Pyramus	O kiss me through the hole of this vile wall!

Thisbe	I kiss the wall's hole, not your lips at all.

Pyramus	Wilt thou at Ninny's tomb meet me straightway?

Thisbe	'Tide life, 'tide death, I come without delay.

	[Exeunt Pyramus and Thisbe]

Wall	Thus have I, Wall, my part discharged so;
	And, being done, thus Wall away doth go.

	[Exit]

THESEUS	Now is the mural down between the two neighbours.

DEMETRIUS	No remedy, my lord, when walls are so wilful to hear
	without warning.

HIPPOLYTA	This is the silliest stuff that ever I heard.

THESEUS	The best in this kind are but shadows; and the worst
	are no worse, if imagination amend them.

HIPPOLYTA	It must be your imagination then, and not theirs.

THESEUS	If we imagine no worse of them than they of
	themselves, they may pass for excellent men. Here
	come two noble beasts in, a man and a lion.

	[Enter Lion and Moonshine]

Lion	You, ladies, you, whose gentle hearts do fear
	The smallest monstrous mouse that creeps on floor,
	May now perchance both quake and tremble here,
	When lion rough in wildest rage doth roar.
	Then know that I, one Snug the joiner, am
	A lion-fell, nor else no lion's dam;
	For, if I should as lion come in strife
	Into this place, 'twere pity on my life.

THESEUS	A very gentle beast, of a good conscience.

DEMETRIUS	The very best at a beast, my lord, that e'er I saw.

LYSANDER	This lion is a very fox for his valour.

THESEUS	True; and a goose for his discretion.

DEMETRIUS	Not so, my lord; for his valour cannot carry his
	discretion; and the fox carries the goose.

THESEUS	His discretion, I am sure, cannot carry his valour;
	for the goose carries not the fox. It is well:
	leave it to his discretion, and let us listen to the moon.

Moonshine	This lanthorn doth the horned moon present;--

DEMETRIUS	He should have worn the horns on his head.

THESEUS	He is no crescent, and his horns are
	invisible within the circumference.

Moonshine	This lanthorn doth the horned moon present;
	Myself the man i' the moon do seem to be.

THESEUS	This is the greatest error of all the rest: the man
	should be put into the lanthorn. How is it else the
	man i' the moon?

DEMETRIUS	He dares not come there for the candle; for, you
	see, it is already in snuff.

HIPPOLYTA	I am aweary of this moon: would he would change!

THESEUS	It appears, by his small light of discretion, that
	he is in the wane; but yet, in courtesy, in all
	reason, we must stay the time.

LYSANDER	Proceed, Moon.

Moonshine	All that I have to say, is, to tell you that the
	lanthorn is the moon; I, the man in the moon; this
	thorn-bush, my thorn-bush; and this dog, my dog.

DEMETRIUS	Why, all these should be in the lanthorn; for all
	these are in the moon. But, silence! here comes Thisbe.

	[Enter Thisbe]

Thisbe	This is old Ninny's tomb. Where is my love?

Lion	[Roaring]  Oh--

	[Thisbe runs off]

DEMETRIUS	Well roared, Lion.

THESEUS	Well run, Thisbe.

HIPPOLYTA	Well shone, Moon. Truly, the moon shines with a
	good grace.

	[The Lion shakes Thisbe's mantle, and exit]

THESEUS	Well moused, Lion.

LYSANDER	And so the lion vanished.

DEMETRIUS	And then came Pyramus.

	[Enter Pyramus]

Pyramus	Sweet Moon, I thank thee for thy sunny beams;
	I thank thee, Moon, for shining now so bright;
	For, by thy gracious, golden, glittering gleams,
	I trust to take of truest Thisby sight.
	But stay, O spite!
	But mark, poor knight,
	What dreadful dole is here!
	Eyes, do you see?
	How can it be?
	O dainty duck! O dear!
	Thy mantle good,
	What, stain'd with blood!
	Approach, ye Furies fell!
	O Fates, come, come,
	Cut thread and thrum;
	Quail, crush, conclude, and quell!

THESEUS	This passion, and the death of a dear friend, would
	go near to make a man look sad.

HIPPOLYTA	Beshrew my heart, but I pity the man.

Pyramus	O wherefore, Nature, didst thou lions frame?
	Since lion vile hath here deflower'd my dear:
	Which is--no, no--which was the fairest dame
	That lived, that loved, that liked, that look'd
	with cheer.
	Come, tears, confound;
	Out, sword, and wound
	The pap of Pyramus;
	Ay, that left pap,
	Where heart doth hop:

	[Stabs himself]

	Thus die I, thus, thus, thus.
	Now am I dead,
	Now am I fled;
	My soul is in the sky:
	Tongue, lose thy light;
	Moon take thy flight:

	[Exit Moonshine]

	Now die, die, die, die, die.

	[Dies]

DEMETRIUS	No die, but an ace, for him; for he is but one.

LYSANDER	Less than an ace, man; for he is dead; he is nothing.

THESEUS	With the help of a surgeon he might yet recover, and
	prove an ass.

HIPPOLYTA	How chance Moonshine is gone before Thisbe comes
	back and finds her lover?

THESEUS	She will find him by starlight. Here she comes; and
	her passion ends the play.

	[Re-enter Thisbe]

HIPPOLYTA	Methinks she should not use a long one for such a
	Pyramus: I hope she will be brief.

DEMETRIUS	A mote will turn the balance, which Pyramus, which
	Thisbe, is the better; he for a man, God warrant us;
	she for a woman, God bless us.

LYSANDER	She hath spied him already with those sweet eyes.

DEMETRIUS	And thus she means, videlicet:--

Thisbe	          Asleep, my love?
	What, dead, my dove?
	O Pyramus, arise!
	Speak, speak. Quite dumb?
	Dead, dead? A tomb
	Must cover thy sweet eyes.
	These My lips,
	This cherry nose,
	These yellow cowslip cheeks,
	Are gone, are gone:
	Lovers, make moan:
	His eyes were green as leeks.
	O Sisters Three,
	Come, come to me,
	With hands as pale as milk;
	Lay them in gore,
	Since you have shore
	With shears his thread of silk.
	Tongue, not a word:
	Come, trusty sword;
	Come, blade, my breast imbrue:

	[Stabs herself]

	And, farewell, friends;
	Thus Thisby ends:
	Adieu, adieu, adieu.

	[Dies]

THESEUS	Moonshine and Lion are left to bury the dead.

DEMETRIUS	Ay, and Wall too.

BOTTOM	[Starting up]  No assure you; the wall is down that
	parted their fathers. Will it please you to see the
	epilogue, or to hear a Bergomask dance between two
	of our company?

THESEUS	No epilogue, I pray you; for your play needs no
	excuse. Never excuse; for when the players are all
	dead, there needs none to be blamed. Marry, if he
	that writ it had played Pyramus and hanged himself
	in Thisbe's garter, it would have been a fine
	tragedy: and so it is, truly; and very notably
	discharged. But come, your Bergomask: let your
	epilogue alone.

	[A dance]

	The iron tongue of midnight hath told twelve:
	Lovers, to bed; 'tis almost fairy time.
	I fear we shall out-sleep the coming morn
	As much as we this night have overwatch'd.
	This palpable-gross play hath well beguiled
	The heavy gait of night. Sweet friends, to bed.
	A fortnight hold we this solemnity,
	In nightly revels and new jollity.

	[Exeunt]

	[Enter PUCK]

PUCK	     Now the hungry lion roars,
	And the wolf behowls the moon;
	Whilst the heavy ploughman snores,
	All with weary task fordone.
	Now the wasted brands do glow,
	Whilst the screech-owl, screeching loud,
	Puts the wretch that lies in woe
	In remembrance of a shroud.
	Now it is the time of night
	That the graves all gaping wide,
	Every one lets forth his sprite,
	In the church-way paths to glide:
	And we fairies, that do run
	By the triple Hecate's team,
	From the presence of the sun,
	Following darkness like a dream,
	Now are frolic: not a mouse
	Shall disturb this hallow'd house:
	I am sent with broom before,
	To sweep the dust behind the door.

	[Enter OBERON and TITANIA with their train]

OBERON	     Through the house give gathering light,
	By the dead and drowsy fire:
	Every elf and fairy sprite
	Hop as light as bird from brier;
	And this ditty, after me,
	Sing, and dance it trippingly.

TITANIA	First, rehearse your song by rote
	To each word a warbling note:
	Hand in hand, with fairy grace,
	Will we sing, and bless this place.

	[Song and dance]

OBERON	Now, until the break of day,
	Through this house each fairy stray.
	To the best bride-bed will we,
	Which by us shall blessed be;
	And the issue there create
	Ever shall be fortunate.
	So shall all the couples three
	Ever true in loving be;
	And the blots of Nature's hand
	Shall not in their issue stand;
	Never mole, hare lip, nor scar,
	Nor mark prodigious, such as are
	Despised in nativity,
	Shall upon their children be.
	With this field-dew consecrate,
	Every fairy take his gait;
	And each several chamber bless,
	Through this palace, with sweet peace;
	And the owner of it blest
	Ever shall in safety rest.
	Trip away; make no stay;
	Meet me all by break of day.

	[Exeunt OBERON, TITANIA, and train]

PUCK	If we shadows have offended,
	Think but this, and all is mended,
	That you have but slumber'd here
	While these visions did appear.
	And this weak and idle theme,
	No more yielding but a dream,
	Gentles, do not reprehend:
	if you pardon, we will mend:
	And, as I am an honest Puck,
	If we have unearned luck
	Now to 'scape the serpent's tongue,
	We will make amends ere long;
	Else the Puck a liar call;
	So, good night unto you all.
	Give me your hands, if we be friends,
	And Robin shall restore amends.



	TWELFTH NIGHT


	DRAMATIS PERSONAE


ORSINO	Duke of Illyria. (DUKE ORSINO:)

SEBASTIAN	brother to Viola.

ANTONIO	a sea captain, friend to Sebastian.

	A Sea Captain, friend to Viola. (Captain:)


VALENTINE	|
	|  gentlemen attending on the Duke.
CURIO	|


SIR TOBY BELCH	uncle to Olivia.

SIR ANDREW
AGUECHEEK	(SIR ANDREW:)

MALVOLIO	steward to Olivia.


FABIAN		|
		|  servants to Olivia.
FESTE	a Clown  (Clown:)	|


OLIVIA:

VIOLA:

MARIA	Olivia's woman.

	Lords, Priests, Sailors, Officers, Musicians,
	and other Attendants.
	(Priest:)
	(First Officer:)
	(Second Officer:)
	(Servant:)


SCENE	A city in Illyria, and the sea-coast near it.




	TWELFTH NIGHT


ACT I



SCENE I	DUKE ORSINO's palace.


	[Enter DUKE ORSINO, CURIO, and other Lords;
	Musicians attending]

DUKE ORSINO	If music be the food of love, play on;
	Give me excess of it, that, surfeiting,
	The appetite may sicken, and so die.
	That strain again! it had a dying fall:
	O, it came o'er my ear like the sweet sound,
	That breathes upon a bank of violets,
	Stealing and giving odour! Enough; no more:
	'Tis not so sweet now as it was before.
	O spirit of love! how quick and fresh art thou,
	That, notwithstanding thy capacity
	Receiveth as the sea, nought enters there,
	Of what validity and pitch soe'er,
	But falls into abatement and low price,
	Even in a minute: so full of shapes is fancy
	That it alone is high fantastical.

CURIO	Will you go hunt, my lord?

DUKE ORSINO	What, Curio?

CURIO	The hart.

DUKE ORSINO	        Why, so I do, the noblest that I have:
	O, when mine eyes did see Olivia first,
	Methought she purged the air of pestilence!
	That instant was I turn'd into a hart;
	And my desires, like fell and cruel hounds,
	E'er since pursue me.

	[Enter VALENTINE]

		How now! what news from her?

VALENTINE	So please my lord, I might not be admitted;
	But from her handmaid do return this answer:
	The element itself, till seven years' heat,
	Shall not behold her face at ample view;
	But, like a cloistress, she will veiled walk
	And water once a day her chamber round
	With eye-offending brine: all this to season
	A brother's dead love, which she would keep fresh
	And lasting in her sad remembrance.

DUKE ORSINO	O, she that hath a heart of that fine frame
	To pay this debt of love but to a brother,
	How will she love, when the rich golden shaft
	Hath kill'd the flock of all affections else
	That live in her; when liver, brain and heart,
	These sovereign thrones, are all supplied, and fill'd
	Her sweet perfections with one self king!
	Away before me to sweet beds of flowers:
	Love-thoughts lie rich when canopied with bowers.

	[Exeunt]




	TWELFTH NIGHT


ACT I



SCENE II	The sea-coast.


	[Enter VIOLA, a Captain, and Sailors]

VIOLA	What country, friends, is this?

Captain	This is Illyria, lady.

VIOLA	And what should I do in Illyria?
	My brother he is in Elysium.
	Perchance he is not drown'd: what think you, sailors?

Captain	It is perchance that you yourself were saved.

VIOLA	O my poor brother! and so perchance may he be.

Captain	True, madam: and, to comfort you with chance,
	Assure yourself, after our ship did split,
	When you and those poor number saved with you
	Hung on our driving boat, I saw your brother,
	Most provident in peril, bind himself,
	Courage and hope both teaching him the practise,
	To a strong mast that lived upon the sea;
	Where, like Arion on the dolphin's back,
	I saw him hold acquaintance with the waves
	So long as I could see.

VIOLA	For saying so, there's gold:
	Mine own escape unfoldeth to my hope,
	Whereto thy speech serves for authority,
	The like of him. Know'st thou this country?

Captain	Ay, madam, well; for I was bred and born
	Not three hours' travel from this very place.

VIOLA	Who governs here?

Captain	A noble duke, in nature as in name.

VIOLA	What is the name?

Captain	Orsino.

VIOLA	Orsino! I have heard my father name him:
	He was a bachelor then.

Captain	And so is now, or was so very late;
	For but a month ago I went from hence,
	And then 'twas fresh in murmur,--as, you know,
	What great ones do the less will prattle of,--
	That he did seek the love of fair Olivia.

VIOLA	What's she?

Captain	A virtuous maid, the daughter of a count
	That died some twelvemonth since, then leaving her
	In the protection of his son, her brother,
	Who shortly also died: for whose dear love,
	They say, she hath abjured the company
	And sight of men.

VIOLA	                  O that I served that lady
	And might not be delivered to the world,
	Till I had made mine own occasion mellow,
	What my estate is!

Captain	That were hard to compass;
	Because she will admit no kind of suit,
	No, not the duke's.

VIOLA	There is a fair behavior in thee, captain;
	And though that nature with a beauteous wall
	Doth oft close in pollution, yet of thee
	I will believe thou hast a mind that suits
	With this thy fair and outward character.
	I prithee, and I'll pay thee bounteously,
	Conceal me what I am, and be my aid
	For such disguise as haply shall become
	The form of my intent. I'll serve this duke:
	Thou shall present me as an eunuch to him:
	It may be worth thy pains; for I can sing
	And speak to him in many sorts of music
	That will allow me very worth his service.
	What else may hap to time I will commit;
	Only shape thou thy silence to my wit.

Captain	Be you his eunuch, and your mute I'll be:
	When my tongue blabs, then let mine eyes not see.

VIOLA	I thank thee: lead me on.

	[Exeunt]




	TWELFTH NIGHT


ACT I



SCENE III	OLIVIA'S house.


	[Enter SIR TOBY BELCH and MARIA]

SIR TOBY BELCH	What a plague means my niece, to take the death of
	her brother thus? I am sure care's an enemy to life.

MARIA	By my troth, Sir Toby, you must come in earlier o'
	nights: your cousin, my lady, takes great
	exceptions to your ill hours.

SIR TOBY BELCH	Why, let her except, before excepted.

MARIA	Ay, but you must confine yourself within the modest
	limits of order.

SIR TOBY BELCH	Confine! I'll confine myself no finer than I am:
	these clothes are good enough to drink in; and so be
	these boots too: an they be not, let them hang
	themselves in their own straps.

MARIA	That quaffing and drinking will undo you: I heard
	my lady talk of it yesterday; and of a foolish
	knight that you brought in one night here to be her wooer.

SIR TOBY BELCH	Who, Sir Andrew Aguecheek?

MARIA	Ay, he.

SIR TOBY BELCH	He's as tall a man as any's in Illyria.

MARIA	What's that to the purpose?

SIR TOBY BELCH	Why, he has three thousand ducats a year.

MARIA	Ay, but he'll have but a year in all these ducats:
	he's a very fool and a prodigal.

SIR TOBY BELCH	Fie, that you'll say so! he plays o' the
	viol-de-gamboys, and speaks three or four languages
	word for word without book, and hath all the good
	gifts of nature.

MARIA	He hath indeed, almost natural: for besides that
	he's a fool, he's a great quarreller: and but that
	he hath the gift of a coward to allay the gust he
	hath in quarrelling, 'tis thought among the prudent
	he would quickly have the gift of a grave.

SIR TOBY BELCH	By this hand, they are scoundrels and subtractors
	that say so of him. Who are they?

MARIA	They that add, moreover, he's drunk nightly in your company.

SIR TOBY BELCH	With drinking healths to my niece: I'll drink to
	her as long as there is a passage in my throat and
	drink in Illyria: he's a coward and a coystrill
	that will not drink to my niece till his brains turn
	o' the toe like a parish-top. What, wench!
	Castiliano vulgo! for here comes Sir Andrew Agueface.

	[Enter SIR ANDREW]

SIR ANDREW	Sir Toby Belch! how now, Sir Toby Belch!

SIR TOBY BELCH	Sweet Sir Andrew!

SIR ANDREW	Bless you, fair shrew.

MARIA	And you too, sir.

SIR TOBY BELCH	Accost, Sir Andrew, accost.

SIR ANDREW	What's that?

SIR TOBY BELCH	My niece's chambermaid.

SIR ANDREW	Good Mistress Accost, I desire better acquaintance.

MARIA	My name is Mary, sir.

SIR ANDREW	Good Mistress Mary Accost,--

SIR TOBY BELCH	You mistake, knight; 'accost' is front her, board
	her, woo her, assail her.

SIR ANDREW	By my troth, I would not undertake her in this
	company. Is that the meaning of 'accost'?

MARIA	Fare you well, gentlemen.

SIR TOBY BELCH	An thou let part so, Sir Andrew, would thou mightst
	never draw sword again.

SIR ANDREW	An you part so, mistress, I would I might never
	draw sword again. Fair lady, do you think you have
	fools in hand?

MARIA	Sir, I have not you by the hand.

SIR ANDREW	Marry, but you shall have; and here's my hand.

MARIA	Now, sir, 'thought is free:' I pray you, bring
	your hand to the buttery-bar and let it drink.

SIR ANDREW	Wherefore, sweet-heart? what's your metaphor?

MARIA	It's dry, sir.

SIR ANDREW	Why, I think so: I am not such an ass but I can
	keep my hand dry. But what's your jest?

MARIA	A dry jest, sir.

SIR ANDREW	Are you full of them?

MARIA	Ay, sir, I have them at my fingers' ends: marry,
	now I let go your hand, I am barren.

	[Exit]

SIR TOBY BELCH	O knight thou lackest a cup of canary: when did I
	see thee so put down?

SIR ANDREW	Never in your life, I think; unless you see canary
	put me down. Methinks sometimes I have no more wit
	than a Christian or an ordinary man has: but I am a
	great eater of beef and I believe that does harm to my wit.

SIR TOBY BELCH	No question.

SIR ANDREW	An I thought that, I'ld forswear it. I'll ride home
	to-morrow, Sir Toby.

SIR TOBY BELCH	Pourquoi, my dear knight?

SIR ANDREW	What is 'Pourquoi'? do or not do? I would I had
	bestowed that time in the tongues that I have in
	fencing, dancing and bear-baiting: O, had I but
	followed the arts!

SIR TOBY BELCH	Then hadst thou had an excellent head of hair.

SIR ANDREW	Why, would that have mended my hair?

SIR TOBY BELCH	Past question; for thou seest it will not curl by nature.

SIR ANDREW	But it becomes me well enough, does't not?

SIR TOBY BELCH	Excellent; it hangs like flax on a distaff; and I
	hope to see a housewife take thee between her legs
	and spin it off.

SIR ANDREW	Faith, I'll home to-morrow, Sir Toby: your niece
	will not be seen; or if she be, it's four to one
	she'll none of me: the count himself here hard by woos her.

SIR TOBY BELCH	She'll none o' the count: she'll not match above
	her degree, neither in estate, years, nor wit; I
	have heard her swear't. Tut, there's life in't,
	man.

SIR ANDREW	I'll stay a month longer. I am a fellow o' the
	strangest mind i' the world; I delight in masques
	and revels sometimes altogether.

SIR TOBY BELCH	Art thou good at these kickshawses, knight?

SIR ANDREW	As any man in Illyria, whatsoever he be, under the
	degree of my betters; and yet I will not compare
	with an old man.

SIR TOBY BELCH	What is thy excellence in a galliard, knight?

SIR ANDREW	Faith, I can cut a caper.

SIR TOBY BELCH	And I can cut the mutton to't.

SIR ANDREW	And I think I have the back-trick simply as strong
	as any man in Illyria.

SIR TOBY BELCH	Wherefore are these things hid? wherefore have
	these gifts a curtain before 'em? are they like to
	take dust, like Mistress Mall's picture? why dost
	thou not go to church in a galliard and come home in
	a coranto? My very walk should be a jig; I would not
	so much as make water but in a sink-a-pace. What
	dost thou mean? Is it a world to hide virtues in?
	I did think, by the excellent constitution of thy
	leg, it was formed under the star of a galliard.

SIR ANDREW	Ay, 'tis strong, and it does indifferent well in a
	flame-coloured stock. Shall we set about some revels?

SIR TOBY BELCH	What shall we do else? were we not born under Taurus?

SIR ANDREW	Taurus! That's sides and heart.

SIR TOBY BELCH	No, sir; it is legs and thighs. Let me see the
	caper; ha! higher: ha, ha! excellent!

	[Exeunt]




	TWELFTH NIGHT


ACT I



SCENE IV	DUKE ORSINO's palace.


	[Enter VALENTINE and VIOLA in man's attire]

VALENTINE	If the duke continue these favours towards you,
	Cesario, you are like to be much advanced: he hath
	known you but three days, and already you are no stranger.

VIOLA	You either fear his humour or my negligence, that
	you call in question the continuance of his love:
	is he inconstant, sir, in his favours?

VALENTINE	No, believe me.

VIOLA	I thank you. Here comes the count.

	[Enter DUKE ORSINO, CURIO, and Attendants]

DUKE ORSINO	Who saw Cesario, ho?

VIOLA	On your attendance, my lord; here.

DUKE ORSINO	Stand you a while aloof, Cesario,
	Thou know'st no less but all; I have unclasp'd
	To thee the book even of my secret soul:
	Therefore, good youth, address thy gait unto her;
	Be not denied access, stand at her doors,
	And tell them, there thy fixed foot shall grow
	Till thou have audience.

VIOLA	Sure, my noble lord,
	If she be so abandon'd to her sorrow
	As it is spoke, she never will admit me.

DUKE ORSINO	Be clamorous and leap all civil bounds
	Rather than make unprofited return.

VIOLA	Say I do speak with her, my lord, what then?

DUKE ORSINO	O, then unfold the passion of my love,
	Surprise her with discourse of my dear faith:
	It shall become thee well to act my woes;
	She will attend it better in thy youth
	Than in a nuncio's of more grave aspect.

VIOLA	I think not so, my lord.

DUKE ORSINO	Dear lad, believe it;
	For they shall yet belie thy happy years,
	That say thou art a man: Diana's lip
	Is not more smooth and rubious; thy small pipe
	Is as the maiden's organ, shrill and sound,
	And all is semblative a woman's part.
	I know thy constellation is right apt
	For this affair. Some four or five attend him;
	All, if you will; for I myself am best
	When least in company. Prosper well in this,
	And thou shalt live as freely as thy lord,
	To call his fortunes thine.

VIOLA	I'll do my best
	To woo your lady:

	[Aside]

	yet, a barful strife!
	Whoe'er I woo, myself would be his wife.

	[Exeunt]




	TWELFTH NIGHT


ACT I



SCENE V	OLIVIA'S house.


	[Enter MARIA and Clown]

MARIA	Nay, either tell me where thou hast been, or I will
	not open my lips so wide as a bristle may enter in
	way of thy excuse: my lady will hang thee for thy absence.

Clown	Let her hang me: he that is well hanged in this
	world needs to fear no colours.

MARIA	Make that good.

Clown	He shall see none to fear.

MARIA	A good lenten answer: I can tell thee where that
	saying was born, of 'I fear no colours.'

Clown	Where, good Mistress Mary?

MARIA	In the wars; and that may you be bold to say in your foolery.

Clown	Well, God give them wisdom that have it; and those
	that are fools, let them use their talents.

MARIA	Yet you will be hanged for being so long absent; or,
	to be turned away, is not that as good as a hanging to you?

Clown	Many a good hanging prevents a bad marriage; and,
	for turning away, let summer bear it out.

MARIA	You are resolute, then?

Clown	Not so, neither; but I am resolved on two points.

MARIA	That if one break, the other will hold; or, if both
	break, your gaskins fall.

Clown	Apt, in good faith; very apt. Well, go thy way; if
	Sir Toby would leave drinking, thou wert as witty a
	piece of Eve's flesh as any in Illyria.

MARIA	Peace, you rogue, no more o' that. Here comes my
	lady: make your excuse wisely, you were best.

	[Exit]

Clown	Wit, an't be thy will, put me into good fooling!
	Those wits, that think they have thee, do very oft
	prove fools; and I, that am sure I lack thee, may
	pass for a wise man: for what says Quinapalus?
	'Better a witty fool, than a foolish wit.'

	[Enter OLIVIA with MALVOLIO]

	God bless thee, lady!

OLIVIA	Take the fool away.

Clown	Do you not hear, fellows? Take away the lady.

OLIVIA	Go to, you're a dry fool; I'll no more of you:
	besides, you grow dishonest.

Clown	Two faults, madonna, that drink and good counsel
	will amend: for give the dry fool drink, then is
	the fool not dry: bid the dishonest man mend
	himself; if he mend, he is no longer dishonest; if
	he cannot, let the botcher mend him. Any thing
	that's mended is but patched: virtue that
	transgresses is but patched with sin; and sin that
	amends is but patched with virtue. If that this
	simple syllogism will serve, so; if it will not,
	what remedy? As there is no true cuckold but
	calamity, so beauty's a flower. The lady bade take
	away the fool; therefore, I say again, take her away.

OLIVIA	Sir, I bade them take away you.

Clown	Misprision in the highest degree! Lady, cucullus non
	facit monachum; that's as much to say as I wear not
	motley in my brain. Good madonna, give me leave to
	prove you a fool.

OLIVIA	Can you do it?

Clown	Dexterously, good madonna.

OLIVIA	Make your proof.

Clown	I must catechise you for it, madonna: good my mouse
	of virtue, answer me.

OLIVIA	Well, sir, for want of other idleness, I'll bide your proof.

Clown	Good madonna, why mournest thou?

OLIVIA	Good fool, for my brother's death.

Clown	I think his soul is in hell, madonna.

OLIVIA	I know his soul is in heaven, fool.

Clown	The more fool, madonna, to mourn for your brother's
	soul being in heaven. Take away the fool, gentlemen.

OLIVIA	What think you of this fool, Malvolio? doth he not mend?

MALVOLIO	Yes, and shall do till the pangs of death shake him:
	infirmity, that decays the wise, doth ever make the
	better fool.

Clown	God send you, sir, a speedy infirmity, for the
	better increasing your folly! Sir Toby will be
	sworn that I am no fox; but he will not pass his
	word for two pence that you are no fool.

OLIVIA	How say you to that, Malvolio?

MALVOLIO	I marvel your ladyship takes delight in such a
	barren rascal: I saw him put down the other day
	with an ordinary fool that has no more brain
	than a stone. Look you now, he's out of his guard
	already; unless you laugh and minister occasion to
	him, he is gagged. I protest, I take these wise men,
	that crow so at these set kind of fools, no better
	than the fools' zanies.

OLIVIA	Oh, you are sick of self-love, Malvolio, and taste
	with a distempered appetite. To be generous,
	guiltless and of free disposition, is to take those
	things for bird-bolts that you deem cannon-bullets:
	there is no slander in an allowed fool, though he do
	nothing but rail; nor no railing in a known discreet
	man, though he do nothing but reprove.

Clown	Now Mercury endue thee with leasing, for thou
	speakest well of fools!

	[Re-enter MARIA]

MARIA	Madam, there is at the gate a young gentleman much
	desires to speak with you.

OLIVIA	From the Count Orsino, is it?

MARIA	I know not, madam: 'tis a fair young man, and well attended.

OLIVIA	Who of my people hold him in delay?

MARIA	Sir Toby, madam, your kinsman.

OLIVIA	Fetch him off, I pray you; he speaks nothing but
	madman: fie on him!

	[Exit MARIA]

	Go you, Malvolio: if it be a suit from the count, I
	am sick, or not at home; what you will, to dismiss it.

	[Exit MALVOLIO]

	Now you see, sir, how your fooling grows old, and
	people dislike it.

Clown	Thou hast spoke for us, madonna, as if thy eldest
	son should be a fool; whose skull Jove cram with
	brains! for,--here he comes,--one of thy kin has a
	most weak pia mater.

	[Enter SIR TOBY BELCH]

OLIVIA	By mine honour, half drunk. What is he at the gate, cousin?

SIR TOBY BELCH	A gentleman.

OLIVIA	A gentleman! what gentleman?

SIR TOBY BELCH	'Tis a gentle man here--a plague o' these
	pickle-herring! How now, sot!

Clown	Good Sir Toby!

OLIVIA	Cousin, cousin, how have you come so early by this lethargy?

SIR TOBY BELCH	Lechery! I defy lechery. There's one at the gate.

OLIVIA	Ay, marry, what is he?

SIR TOBY BELCH	Let him be the devil, an he will, I care not: give
	me faith, say I. Well, it's all one.

	[Exit]

OLIVIA	What's a drunken man like, fool?

Clown	Like a drowned man, a fool and a mad man: one
	draught above heat makes him a fool; the second mads
	him; and a third drowns him.

OLIVIA	Go thou and seek the crowner, and let him sit o' my
	coz; for he's in the third degree of drink, he's
	drowned: go, look after him.

Clown	He is but mad yet, madonna; and the fool shall look
	to the madman.

	[Exit]

	[Re-enter MALVOLIO]

MALVOLIO	Madam, yond young fellow swears he will speak with
	you. I told him you were sick; he takes on him to
	understand so much, and therefore comes to speak
	with you. I told him you were asleep; he seems to
	have a foreknowledge of that too, and therefore
	comes to speak with you. What is to be said to him,
	lady? he's fortified against any denial.

OLIVIA	Tell him he shall not speak with me.

MALVOLIO	Has been told so; and he says, he'll stand at your
	door like a sheriff's post, and be the supporter to
	a bench, but he'll speak with you.

OLIVIA	What kind o' man is he?

MALVOLIO	Why, of mankind.

OLIVIA	What manner of man?

MALVOLIO	Of very ill manner; he'll speak with you, will you or no.

OLIVIA	Of what personage and years is he?

MALVOLIO	Not yet old enough for a man, nor young enough for
	a boy; as a squash is before 'tis a peascod, or a
	cooling when 'tis almost an apple: 'tis with him
	in standing water, between boy and man. He is very
	well-favoured and he speaks very shrewishly; one
	would think his mother's milk were scarce out of him.

OLIVIA	Let him approach: call in my gentlewoman.

MALVOLIO	Gentlewoman, my lady calls.

	[Exit]

	[Re-enter MARIA]

OLIVIA	Give me my veil: come, throw it o'er my face.
	We'll once more hear Orsino's embassy.

	[Enter VIOLA, and Attendants]

VIOLA	The honourable lady of the house, which is she?

OLIVIA	Speak to me; I shall answer for her.
	Your will?

VIOLA	Most radiant, exquisite and unmatchable beauty,--I
	pray you, tell me if this be the lady of the house,
	for I never saw her: I would be loath to cast away
	my speech, for besides that it is excellently well
	penned, I have taken great pains to con it. Good
	beauties, let me sustain no scorn; I am very
	comptible, even to the least sinister usage.

OLIVIA	Whence came you, sir?

VIOLA	I can say little more than I have studied, and that
	question's out of my part. Good gentle one, give me
	modest assurance if you be the lady of the house,
	that I may proceed in my speech.

OLIVIA	Are you a comedian?

VIOLA	No, my profound heart: and yet, by the very fangs
	of malice I swear, I am not that I play. Are you
	the lady of the house?

OLIVIA	If I do not usurp myself, I am.

VIOLA	Most certain, if you are she, you do usurp
	yourself; for what is yours to bestow is not yours
	to reserve. But this is from my commission: I will
	on with my speech in your praise, and then show you
	the heart of my message.

OLIVIA	Come to what is important in't: I forgive you the praise.

VIOLA	Alas, I took great pains to study it, and 'tis poetical.

OLIVIA	It is the more like to be feigned: I pray you,
	keep it in. I heard you were saucy at my gates,
	and allowed your approach rather to wonder at you
	than to hear you. If you be not mad, be gone; if
	you have reason, be brief: 'tis not that time of
	moon with me to make one in so skipping a dialogue.

MARIA	Will you hoist sail, sir? here lies your way.

VIOLA	No, good swabber; I am to hull here a little
	longer. Some mollification for your giant, sweet
	lady. Tell me your mind: I am a messenger.

OLIVIA	Sure, you have some hideous matter to deliver, when
	the courtesy of it is so fearful. Speak your office.

VIOLA	It alone concerns your ear. I bring no overture of
	war, no taxation of homage: I hold the olive in my
	hand; my words are as fun of peace as matter.

OLIVIA	Yet you began rudely. What are you? what would you?

VIOLA	The rudeness that hath appeared in me have I
	learned from my entertainment. What I am, and what I
	would, are as secret as maidenhead; to your ears,
	divinity, to any other's, profanation.

OLIVIA	Give us the place alone: we will hear this divinity.

	[Exeunt MARIA and Attendants]

	Now, sir, what is your text?

VIOLA	Most sweet lady,--

OLIVIA	A comfortable doctrine, and much may be said of it.
	Where lies your text?

VIOLA	In Orsino's bosom.

OLIVIA	In his bosom! In what chapter of his bosom?

VIOLA	To answer by the method, in the first of his heart.

OLIVIA	O, I have read it: it is heresy. Have you no more to say?

VIOLA	Good madam, let me see your face.

OLIVIA	Have you any commission from your lord to negotiate
	with my face? You are now out of your text: but
	we will draw the curtain and show you the picture.
	Look you, sir, such a one I was this present: is't
	not well done?

	[Unveiling]

VIOLA	Excellently done, if God did all.

OLIVIA	'Tis in grain, sir; 'twill endure wind and weather.

VIOLA	'Tis beauty truly blent, whose red and white
	Nature's own sweet and cunning hand laid on:
	Lady, you are the cruell'st she alive,
	If you will lead these graces to the grave
	And leave the world no copy.

OLIVIA	O, sir, I will not be so hard-hearted; I will give
	out divers schedules of my beauty: it shall be
	inventoried, and every particle and utensil
	labelled to my will: as, item, two lips,
	indifferent red; item, two grey eyes, with lids to
	them; item, one neck, one chin, and so forth. Were
	you sent hither to praise me?

VIOLA	I see you what you are, you are too proud;
	But, if you were the devil, you are fair.
	My lord and master loves you: O, such love
	Could be but recompensed, though you were crown'd
	The nonpareil of beauty!

OLIVIA	How does he love me?

VIOLA	With adorations, fertile tears,
	With groans that thunder love, with sighs of fire.

OLIVIA	Your lord does know my mind; I cannot love him:
	Yet I suppose him virtuous, know him noble,
	Of great estate, of fresh and stainless youth;
	In voices well divulged, free, learn'd and valiant;
	And in dimension and the shape of nature
	A gracious person: but yet I cannot love him;
	He might have took his answer long ago.

VIOLA	If I did love you in my master's flame,
	With such a suffering, such a deadly life,
	In your denial I would find no sense;
	I would not understand it.

OLIVIA	Why, what would you?

VIOLA	Make me a willow cabin at your gate,
	And call upon my soul within the house;
	Write loyal cantons of contemned love
	And sing them loud even in the dead of night;
	Halloo your name to the reverberate hills
	And make the babbling gossip of the air
	Cry out 'Olivia!' O, You should not rest
	Between the elements of air and earth,
	But you should pity me!

OLIVIA	You might do much.
	What is your parentage?

VIOLA	Above my fortunes, yet my state is well:
	I am a gentleman.

OLIVIA	                  Get you to your lord;
	I cannot love him: let him send no more;
	Unless, perchance, you come to me again,
	To tell me how he takes it. Fare you well:
	I thank you for your pains: spend this for me.

VIOLA	I am no fee'd post, lady; keep your purse:
	My master, not myself, lacks recompense.
	Love make his heart of flint that you shall love;
	And let your fervor, like my master's, be
	Placed in contempt! Farewell, fair cruelty.

	[Exit]

OLIVIA	'What is your parentage?'
	'Above my fortunes, yet my state is well:
	I am a gentleman.' I'll be sworn thou art;
	Thy tongue, thy face, thy limbs, actions and spirit,
	Do give thee five-fold blazon: not too fast:
	soft, soft!
	Unless the master were the man. How now!
	Even so quickly may one catch the plague?
	Methinks I feel this youth's perfections
	With an invisible and subtle stealth
	To creep in at mine eyes. Well, let it be.
	What ho, Malvolio!

	[Re-enter MALVOLIO]

MALVOLIO	                  Here, madam, at your service.

OLIVIA	Run after that same peevish messenger,
	The county's man: he left this ring behind him,
	Would I or not: tell him I'll none of it.
	Desire him not to flatter with his lord,
	Nor hold him up with hopes; I am not for him:
	If that the youth will come this way to-morrow,
	I'll give him reasons for't: hie thee, Malvolio.

MALVOLIO	Madam, I will.

	[Exit]

OLIVIA	I do I know not what, and fear to find
	Mine eye too great a flatterer for my mind.
	Fate, show thy force: ourselves we do not owe;
	What is decreed must be, and be this so.

	[Exit]




	TWELFTH NIGHT


ACT II



SCENE I	The sea-coast.


	[Enter ANTONIO and SEBASTIAN]

ANTONIO	Will you stay no longer? nor will you not that I go with you?

SEBASTIAN	By your patience, no. My stars shine darkly over
	me: the malignancy of my fate might perhaps
	distemper yours; therefore I shall crave of you your
	leave that I may bear my evils alone: it were a bad
	recompense for your love, to lay any of them on you.

ANTONIO: Let me yet know of you whither you are bound.

SEBASTIAN	No, sooth, sir: my determinate voyage is mere
	extravagancy. But I perceive in you so excellent a
	touch of modesty, that you will not extort from me
	what I am willing to keep in; therefore it charges
	me in manners the rather to express myself. You
	must know of me then, Antonio, my name is Sebastian,
	which I called Roderigo. My father was that
	Sebastian of Messaline, whom I know you have heard
	of. He left behind him myself and a sister, both
	born in an hour: if the heavens had been pleased,
	would we had so ended! but you, sir, altered that;
	for some hour before you took me from the breach of
	the sea was my sister drowned.

ANTONIO	Alas the day!

SEBASTIAN	A lady, sir, though it was said she much resembled
	me, was yet of many accounted beautiful: but,
	though I could not with such estimable wonder
	overfar believe that, yet thus far I will boldly
	publish her; she bore a mind that envy could not but
	call fair. She is drowned already, sir, with salt
	water, though I seem to drown her remembrance again with more.

ANTONIO	Pardon me, sir, your bad entertainment.

SEBASTIAN	O good Antonio, forgive me your trouble.

ANTONIO	If you will not murder me for my love, let me be
	your servant.

SEBASTIAN	If you will not undo what you have done, that is,
	kill him whom you have recovered, desire it not.
	Fare ye well at once: my bosom is full of kindness,
	and I am yet so near the manners of my mother, that
	upon the least occasion more mine eyes will tell
	tales of me. I am bound to the Count Orsino's court: farewell.

	[Exit]

ANTONIO	The gentleness of all the gods go with thee!
	I have many enemies in Orsino's court,
	Else would I very shortly see thee there.
	But, come what may, I do adore thee so,
	That danger shall seem sport, and I will go.

	[Exit]




	TWELFTH NIGHT


ACT II



SCENE II	A street.


	[Enter VIOLA, MALVOLIO following]

MALVOLIO	Were not you even now with the Countess Olivia?

VIOLA	Even now, sir; on a moderate pace I have since
	arrived but hither.

MALVOLIO	She returns this ring to you, sir: you might have
	saved me my pains, to have taken it away yourself.
	She adds, moreover, that you should put your lord
	into a desperate assurance she will none of him:
	and one thing more, that you be never so hardy to
	come again in his affairs, unless it be to report
	your lord's taking of this. Receive it so.

VIOLA	She took the ring of me: I'll none of it.

MALVOLIO	Come, sir, you peevishly threw it to her; and her
	will is, it should be so returned: if it be worth
	stooping for, there it lies in your eye; if not, be
	it his that finds it.

	[Exit]

VIOLA	I left no ring with her: what means this lady?
	Fortune forbid my outside have not charm'd her!
	She made good view of me; indeed, so much,
	That sure methought her eyes had lost her tongue,
	For she did speak in starts distractedly.
	She loves me, sure; the cunning of her passion
	Invites me in this churlish messenger.
	None of my lord's ring! why, he sent her none.
	I am the man: if it be so, as 'tis,
	Poor lady, she were better love a dream.
	Disguise, I see, thou art a wickedness,
	Wherein the pregnant enemy does much.
	How easy is it for the proper-false
	In women's waxen hearts to set their forms!
	Alas, our frailty is the cause, not we!
	For such as we are made of, such we be.
	How will this fadge? my master loves her dearly;
	And I, poor monster, fond as much on him;
	And she, mistaken, seems to dote on me.
	What will become of this? As I am man,
	My state is desperate for my master's love;
	As I am woman,--now alas the day!--
	What thriftless sighs shall poor Olivia breathe!
	O time! thou must untangle this, not I;
	It is too hard a knot for me to untie!

	[Exit]




	TWELFTH NIGHT


ACT II



SCENE III	OLIVIA's house.


	[Enter SIR TOBY BELCH and SIR ANDREW]

SIR TOBY BELCH	Approach, Sir Andrew: not to be abed after
	midnight is to be up betimes; and 'diluculo
	surgere,' thou know'st,--

SIR ANDREW	Nay, my troth, I know not: but I know, to be up
	late is to be up late.

SIR TOBY BELCH	A false conclusion: I hate it as an unfilled can.
	To be up after midnight and to go to bed then, is
	early: so that to go to bed after midnight is to go
	to bed betimes. Does not our life consist of the
	four elements?

SIR ANDREW	Faith, so they say; but I think it rather consists
	of eating and drinking.

SIR TOBY BELCH	Thou'rt a scholar; let us therefore eat and drink.
	Marian, I say! a stoup of wine!

	[Enter Clown]

SIR ANDREW	Here comes the fool, i' faith.

Clown	How now, my hearts! did you never see the picture
	of 'we three'?

SIR TOBY BELCH	Welcome, ass. Now let's have a catch.

SIR ANDREW	By my troth, the fool has an excellent breast. I
	had rather than forty shillings I had such a leg,
	and so sweet a breath to sing, as the fool has. In
	sooth, thou wast in very gracious fooling last
	night, when thou spokest of Pigrogromitus, of the
	Vapians passing the equinoctial of Queubus: 'twas
	very good, i' faith. I sent thee sixpence for thy
	leman: hadst it?

Clown	I did impeticos thy gratillity; for Malvolio's nose
	is no whipstock: my lady has a white hand, and the
	Myrmidons are no bottle-ale houses.

SIR ANDREW	Excellent! why, this is the best fooling, when all
	is done. Now, a song.

SIR TOBY BELCH	Come on; there is sixpence for you: let's have a song.

SIR ANDREW	There's a testril of me too: if one knight give a--

Clown	Would you have a love-song, or a song of good life?

SIR TOBY BELCH	A love-song, a love-song.

SIR ANDREW	Ay, ay: I care not for good life.

Clown	[Sings]

	O mistress mine, where are you roaming?
	O, stay and hear; your true love's coming,
	That can sing both high and low:
	Trip no further, pretty sweeting;
	Journeys end in lovers meeting,
	Every wise man's son doth know.

SIR ANDREW	Excellent good, i' faith.

SIR TOBY BELCH	Good, good.

Clown	[Sings]

	What is love? 'tis not hereafter;
	Present mirth hath present laughter;
	What's to come is still unsure:
	In delay there lies no plenty;
	Then come kiss me, sweet and twenty,
	Youth's a stuff will not endure.

SIR ANDREW	A mellifluous voice, as I am true knight.

SIR TOBY BELCH	A contagious breath.

SIR ANDREW	Very sweet and contagious, i' faith.

SIR TOBY BELCH	To hear by the nose, it is dulcet in contagion.
	But shall we make the welkin dance indeed? shall we
	rouse the night-owl in a catch that will draw three
	souls out of one weaver? shall we do that?

SIR ANDREW	An you love me, let's do't: I am dog at a catch.

Clown	By'r lady, sir, and some dogs will catch well.

SIR ANDREW	Most certain. Let our catch be, 'Thou knave.'

Clown	'Hold thy peace, thou knave,' knight? I shall be
	constrained in't to call thee knave, knight.

SIR ANDREW	'Tis not the first time I have constrained one to
	call me knave. Begin, fool: it begins 'Hold thy peace.'

Clown	I shall never begin if I hold my peace.

SIR ANDREW	Good, i' faith. Come, begin.

	[Catch sung]

	[Enter MARIA]

MARIA	What a caterwauling do you keep here! If my lady
	have not called up her steward Malvolio and bid him
	turn you out of doors, never trust me.

SIR TOBY BELCH	My lady's a Cataian, we are politicians, Malvolio's
	a Peg-a-Ramsey, and 'Three merry men be we.' Am not
	I consanguineous? am I not of her blood?
	Tillyvally. Lady!

	[Sings]

	'There dwelt a man in Babylon, lady, lady!'

Clown	Beshrew me, the knight's in admirable fooling.

SIR ANDREW	Ay, he does well enough if he be disposed, and so do
	I too: he does it with a better grace, but I do it
	more natural.

SIR TOBY BELCH	[Sings]  'O, the twelfth day of December,'--

MARIA	For the love o' God, peace!

	[Enter MALVOLIO]

MALVOLIO	My masters, are you mad? or what are you? Have ye
	no wit, manners, nor honesty, but to gabble like
	tinkers at this time of night? Do ye make an
	alehouse of my lady's house, that ye squeak out your
	coziers' catches without any mitigation or remorse
	of voice? Is there no respect of place, persons, nor
	time in you?

SIR TOBY BELCH	We did keep time, sir, in our catches. Sneck up!

MALVOLIO	Sir Toby, I must be round with you. My lady bade me
	tell you, that, though she harbours you as her
	kinsman, she's nothing allied to your disorders. If
	you can separate yourself and your misdemeanors, you
	are welcome to the house; if not, an it would please
	you to take leave of her, she is very willing to bid
	you farewell.

SIR TOBY BELCH	'Farewell, dear heart, since I must needs be gone.'

MARIA	Nay, good Sir Toby.

Clown	'His eyes do show his days are almost done.'

MALVOLIO	Is't even so?

SIR TOBY BELCH	'But I will never die.'

Clown	Sir Toby, there you lie.

MALVOLIO	This is much credit to you.

SIR TOBY BELCH	'Shall I bid him go?'

Clown	'What an if you do?'

SIR TOBY BELCH	'Shall I bid him go, and spare not?'

Clown	'O no, no, no, no, you dare not.'

SIR TOBY BELCH	Out o' tune, sir: ye lie. Art any more than a
	steward? Dost thou think, because thou art
	virtuous, there shall be no more cakes and ale?

Clown	Yes, by Saint Anne, and ginger shall be hot i' the
	mouth too.

SIR TOBY BELCH	Thou'rt i' the right. Go, sir, rub your chain with
	crumbs. A stoup of wine, Maria!

MALVOLIO	Mistress Mary, if you prized my lady's favour at any
	thing more than contempt, you would not give means
	for this uncivil rule: she shall know of it, by this hand.

	[Exit]

MARIA	Go shake your ears.

SIR ANDREW	'Twere as good a deed as to drink when a man's
	a-hungry, to challenge him the field, and then to
	break promise with him and make a fool of him.

SIR TOBY BELCH	Do't, knight: I'll write thee a challenge: or I'll
	deliver thy indignation to him by word of mouth.

MARIA	Sweet Sir Toby, be patient for tonight: since the
	youth of the count's was today with thy lady, she is
	much out of quiet. For Monsieur Malvolio, let me
	alone with him: if I do not gull him into a
	nayword, and make him a common recreation, do not
	think I have wit enough to lie straight in my bed:
	I know I can do it.

SIR TOBY BELCH	Possess us, possess us; tell us something of him.

MARIA	Marry, sir, sometimes he is a kind of puritan.

SIR ANDREW	O, if I thought that I'ld beat him like a dog!

SIR TOBY BELCH	What, for being a puritan? thy exquisite reason,
	dear knight?

SIR ANDREW	I have no exquisite reason for't, but I have reason
	good enough.

MARIA	The devil a puritan that he is, or any thing
	constantly, but a time-pleaser; an affectioned ass,
	that cons state without book and utters it by great
	swarths: the best persuaded of himself, so
	crammed, as he thinks, with excellencies, that it is
	his grounds of faith that all that look on him love
	him; and on that vice in him will my revenge find
	notable cause to work.

SIR TOBY BELCH	What wilt thou do?

MARIA	I will drop in his way some obscure epistles of
	love; wherein, by the colour of his beard, the shape
	of his leg, the manner of his gait, the expressure
	of his eye, forehead, and complexion, he shall find
	himself most feelingly personated. I can write very
	like my lady your niece: on a forgotten matter we
	can hardly make distinction of our hands.

SIR TOBY BELCH	Excellent! I smell a device.

SIR ANDREW	I have't in my nose too.

SIR TOBY BELCH	He shall think, by the letters that thou wilt drop,
	that they come from my niece, and that she's in
	love with him.

MARIA	My purpose is, indeed, a horse of that colour.

SIR ANDREW	And your horse now would make him an ass.

MARIA	Ass, I doubt not.

SIR ANDREW	O, 'twill be admirable!

MARIA	Sport royal, I warrant you: I know my physic will
	work with him. I will plant you two, and let the
	fool make a third, where he shall find the letter:
	observe his construction of it. For this night, to
	bed, and dream on the event. Farewell.

	[Exit]

SIR TOBY BELCH	Good night, Penthesilea.

SIR ANDREW	Before me, she's a good wench.

SIR TOBY BELCH	She's a beagle, true-bred, and one that adores me:
	what o' that?

SIR ANDREW	I was adored once too.

SIR TOBY BELCH	Let's to bed, knight. Thou hadst need send for
	more money.

SIR ANDREW	If I cannot recover your niece, I am a foul way out.

SIR TOBY BELCH	Send for money, knight: if thou hast her not i'
	the end, call me cut.

SIR ANDREW	If I do not, never trust me, take it how you will.

SIR TOBY BELCH	Come, come, I'll go burn some sack; 'tis too late
	to go to bed now: come, knight; come, knight.

	[Exeunt]




	TWELFTH NIGHT


ACT II



SCENE IV	DUKE ORSINO's palace.


	[Enter DUKE ORSINO, VIOLA, CURIO, and others]

DUKE ORSINO	Give me some music. Now, good morrow, friends.
	Now, good Cesario, but that piece of song,
	That old and antique song we heard last night:
	Methought it did relieve my passion much,
	More than light airs and recollected terms
	Of these most brisk and giddy-paced times:
	Come, but one verse.

CURIO	He is not here, so please your lordship that should sing it.

DUKE ORSINO	Who was it?

CURIO	Feste, the jester, my lord; a fool that the lady
	Olivia's father took much delight in. He is about the house.

DUKE ORSINO	Seek him out, and play the tune the while.

	[Exit CURIO. Music plays]

	Come hither, boy: if ever thou shalt love,
	In the sweet pangs of it remember me;
	For such as I am all true lovers are,
	Unstaid and skittish in all motions else,
	Save in the constant image of the creature
	That is beloved. How dost thou like this tune?

VIOLA	It gives a very echo to the seat
	Where Love is throned.

DUKE ORSINO	Thou dost speak masterly:
	My life upon't, young though thou art, thine eye
	Hath stay'd upon some favour that it loves:
	Hath it not, boy?

VIOLA	                  A little, by your favour.

DUKE ORSINO	What kind of woman is't?

VIOLA	Of your complexion.

DUKE ORSINO	She is not worth thee, then. What years, i' faith?

VIOLA	About your years, my lord.

DUKE ORSINO	Too old by heaven: let still the woman take
	An elder than herself: so wears she to him,
	So sways she level in her husband's heart:
	For, boy, however we do praise ourselves,
	Our fancies are more giddy and unfirm,
	More longing, wavering, sooner lost and worn,
	Than women's are.

VIOLA	                  I think it well, my lord.

DUKE ORSINO	Then let thy love be younger than thyself,
	Or thy affection cannot hold the bent;
	For women are as roses, whose fair flower
	Being once display'd, doth fall that very hour.

VIOLA	And so they are: alas, that they are so;
	To die, even when they to perfection grow!

	[Re-enter CURIO and Clown]

DUKE ORSINO	O, fellow, come, the song we had last night.
	Mark it, Cesario, it is old and plain;
	The spinsters and the knitters in the sun
	And the free maids that weave their thread with bones
	Do use to chant it: it is silly sooth,
	And dallies with the innocence of love,
	Like the old age.

Clown	Are you ready, sir?

DUKE ORSINO	Ay; prithee, sing.

	[Music]
	
	SONG.
Clown	Come away, come away, death,
	And in sad cypress let me be laid;
	Fly away, fly away breath;
	I am slain by a fair cruel maid.
	My shroud of white, stuck all with yew,
	O, prepare it!
	My part of death, no one so true
	Did share it.
	Not a flower, not a flower sweet
	On my black coffin let there be strown;
	Not a friend, not a friend greet
	My poor corpse, where my bones shall be thrown:
	A thousand thousand sighs to save,
	Lay me, O, where
	Sad true lover never find my grave,
	To weep there!

DUKE ORSINO	There's for thy pains.

Clown	No pains, sir: I take pleasure in singing, sir.

DUKE ORSINO	I'll pay thy pleasure then.

Clown	Truly, sir, and pleasure will be paid, one time or another.

DUKE ORSINO	Give me now leave to leave thee.

Clown	Now, the melancholy god protect thee; and the
	tailor make thy doublet of changeable taffeta, for
	thy mind is a very opal. I would have men of such
	constancy put to sea, that their business might be
	every thing and their intent every where; for that's
	it that always makes a good voyage of nothing. Farewell.

	[Exit]

DUKE ORSINO	Let all the rest give place.

	[CURIO and Attendants retire]

		       Once more, Cesario,
	Get thee to yond same sovereign cruelty:
	Tell her, my love, more noble than the world,
	Prizes not quantity of dirty lands;
	The parts that fortune hath bestow'd upon her,
	Tell her, I hold as giddily as fortune;
	But 'tis that miracle and queen of gems
	That nature pranks her in attracts my soul.

VIOLA	But if she cannot love you, sir?

DUKE ORSINO	I cannot be so answer'd.

VIOLA	Sooth, but you must.
	Say that some lady, as perhaps there is,
	Hath for your love a great a pang of heart
	As you have for Olivia: you cannot love her;
	You tell her so; must she not then be answer'd?

DUKE ORSINO	There is no woman's sides
	Can bide the beating of so strong a passion
	As love doth give my heart; no woman's heart
	So big, to hold so much; they lack retention
	Alas, their love may be call'd appetite,
	No motion of the liver, but the palate,
	That suffer surfeit, cloyment and revolt;
	But mine is all as hungry as the sea,
	And can digest as much: make no compare
	Between that love a woman can bear me
	And that I owe Olivia.

VIOLA	Ay, but I know--

DUKE ORSINO	What dost thou know?

VIOLA	Too well what love women to men may owe:
	In faith, they are as true of heart as we.
	My father had a daughter loved a man,
	As it might be, perhaps, were I a woman,
	I should your lordship.

DUKE ORSINO	And what's her history?

VIOLA	A blank, my lord. She never told her love,
	But let concealment, like a worm i' the bud,
	Feed on her damask cheek: she pined in thought,
	And with a green and yellow melancholy
	She sat like patience on a monument,
	Smiling at grief. Was not this love indeed?
	We men may say more, swear more: but indeed
	Our shows are more than will; for still we prove
	Much in our vows, but little in our love.

DUKE ORSINO	But died thy sister of her love, my boy?

VIOLA	I am all the daughters of my father's house,
	And all the brothers too: and yet I know not.
	Sir, shall I to this lady?

DUKE ORSINO	Ay, that's the theme.
	To her in haste; give her this jewel; say,
	My love can give no place, bide no denay.

	[Exeunt]




	TWELFTH NIGHT


ACT II



SCENE V	OLIVIA's garden.


	[Enter SIR TOBY BELCH, SIR ANDREW, and FABIAN]

SIR TOBY BELCH	Come thy ways, Signior Fabian.

FABIAN	Nay, I'll come: if I lose a scruple of this sport,
	let me be boiled to death with melancholy.

SIR TOBY BELCH	Wouldst thou not be glad to have the niggardly
	rascally sheep-biter come by some notable shame?

FABIAN	I would exult, man: you know, he brought me out o'
	favour with my lady about a bear-baiting here.

SIR TOBY BELCH	To anger him we'll have the bear again; and we will
	fool him black and blue: shall we not, Sir Andrew?

SIR ANDREW	An we do not, it is pity of our lives.

SIR TOBY BELCH	Here comes the little villain.

	[Enter MARIA]

	How now, my metal of India!

MARIA	Get ye all three into the box-tree: Malvolio's
	coming down this walk: he has been yonder i' the
	sun practising behavior to his own shadow this half
	hour: observe him, for the love of mockery; for I
	know this letter will make a contemplative idiot of
	him. Close, in the name of jesting! Lie thou there,

	[Throws down a letter]

	for here comes the trout that must be caught with tickling.

	[Exit]

	[Enter MALVOLIO]

MALVOLIO	'Tis but fortune; all is fortune. Maria once told
	me she did affect me: and I have heard herself come
	thus near, that, should she fancy, it should be one
	of my complexion. Besides, she uses me with a more
	exalted respect than any one else that follows her.
	What should I think on't?

SIR TOBY BELCH	Here's an overweening rogue!

FABIAN	O, peace! Contemplation makes a rare turkey-cock
	of him: how he jets under his advanced plumes!

SIR ANDREW	'Slight, I could so beat the rogue!

SIR TOBY BELCH	Peace, I say.

MALVOLIO	To be Count Malvolio!

SIR TOBY BELCH	Ah, rogue!

SIR ANDREW	Pistol him, pistol him.

SIR TOBY BELCH	Peace, peace!

MALVOLIO	There is example for't; the lady of the Strachy
	married the yeoman of the wardrobe.

SIR ANDREW	Fie on him, Jezebel!

FABIAN	O, peace! now he's deeply in: look how
	imagination blows him.

MALVOLIO	Having been three months married to her, sitting in
	my state,--

SIR TOBY BELCH	O, for a stone-bow, to hit him in the eye!

MALVOLIO	Calling my officers about me, in my branched velvet
	gown; having come from a day-bed, where I have left
	Olivia sleeping,--

SIR TOBY BELCH	Fire and brimstone!

FABIAN	O, peace, peace!

MALVOLIO	And then to have the humour of state; and after a
	demure travel of regard, telling them I know my
	place as I would they should do theirs, to for my
	kinsman Toby,--

SIR TOBY BELCH	Bolts and shackles!

FABIAN	O peace, peace, peace! now, now.

MALVOLIO	Seven of my people, with an obedient start, make
	out for him: I frown the while; and perchance wind
	up watch, or play with my--some rich jewel. Toby
	approaches; courtesies there to me,--

SIR TOBY BELCH	Shall this fellow live?

FABIAN	Though our silence be drawn from us with cars, yet peace.

MALVOLIO	I extend my hand to him thus, quenching my familiar
	smile with an austere regard of control,--

SIR TOBY BELCH	And does not Toby take you a blow o' the lips then?

MALVOLIO	Saying, 'Cousin Toby, my fortunes having cast me on
	your niece give me this prerogative of speech,'--

SIR TOBY BELCH	What, what?

MALVOLIO	'You must amend your drunkenness.'

SIR TOBY BELCH	Out, scab!

FABIAN	Nay, patience, or we break the sinews of our plot.

MALVOLIO	'Besides, you waste the treasure of your time with
	a foolish knight,'--

SIR ANDREW	That's me, I warrant you.

MALVOLIO	'One Sir Andrew,'--

SIR ANDREW	I knew 'twas I; for many do call me fool.

MALVOLIO	What employment have we here?

	[Taking up the letter]

FABIAN	Now is the woodcock near the gin.

SIR TOBY BELCH	O, peace! and the spirit of humour intimate reading
	aloud to him!

MALVOLIO	By my life, this is my lady's hand these be her
	very C's, her U's and her T's and thus makes she her
	great P's. It is, in contempt of question, her hand.

SIR ANDREW	Her C's, her U's and her T's: why that?

MALVOLIO	[Reads]  'To the unknown beloved, this, and my good
	wishes:'--her very phrases! By your leave, wax.
	Soft! and the impressure her Lucrece, with which she
	uses to seal: 'tis my lady. To whom should this be?

FABIAN	This wins him, liver and all.

MALVOLIO	[Reads]

	Jove knows I love: But who?
	Lips, do not move;
	No man must know.
	'No man must know.' What follows? the numbers
	altered! 'No man must know:' if this should be
	thee, Malvolio?

SIR TOBY BELCH	Marry, hang thee, brock!

MALVOLIO	[Reads]
	I may command where I adore;
	But silence, like a Lucrece knife,
	With bloodless stroke my heart doth gore:
	M, O, A, I, doth sway my life.

FABIAN	A fustian riddle!

SIR TOBY BELCH	Excellent wench, say I.

MALVOLIO	'M, O, A, I, doth sway my life.' Nay, but first, let
	me see, let me see, let me see.

FABIAN	What dish o' poison has she dressed him!

SIR TOBY BELCH	And with what wing the staniel cheques at it!

MALVOLIO	'I may command where I adore.' Why, she may command
	me: I serve her; she is my lady. Why, this is
	evident to any formal capacity; there is no
	obstruction in this: and the end,--what should
	that alphabetical position portend? If I could make
	that resemble something in me,--Softly! M, O, A,
	I,--

SIR TOBY BELCH	O, ay, make up that: he is now at a cold scent.

FABIAN	Sowter will cry upon't for all this, though it be as
	rank as a fox.

MALVOLIO	M,--Malvolio; M,--why, that begins my name.

FABIAN	Did not I say he would work it out? the cur is
	excellent at faults.

MALVOLIO	M,--but then there is no consonancy in the sequel;
	that suffers under probation A should follow but O does.

FABIAN	And O shall end, I hope.

SIR TOBY BELCH	Ay, or I'll cudgel him, and make him cry O!

MALVOLIO	And then I comes behind.

FABIAN	Ay, an you had any eye behind you, you might see
	more detraction at your heels than fortunes before
	you.

MALVOLIO	M, O, A, I; this simulation is not as the former: and
	yet, to crush this a little, it would bow to me, for
	every one of these letters are in my name. Soft!
	here follows prose.

	[Reads]

	'If this fall into thy hand, revolve. In my stars I
	am above thee; but be not afraid of greatness: some
	are born great, some achieve greatness, and some
	have greatness thrust upon 'em. Thy Fates open
	their hands; let thy blood and spirit embrace them;
	and, to inure thyself to what thou art like to be,
	cast thy humble slough and appear fresh. Be
	opposite with a kinsman, surly with servants; let
	thy tongue tang arguments of state; put thyself into
	the trick of singularity: she thus advises thee
	that sighs for thee. Remember who commended thy
	yellow stockings, and wished to see thee ever
	cross-gartered: I say, remember. Go to, thou art
	made, if thou desirest to be so; if not, let me see
	thee a steward still, the fellow of servants, and
	not worthy to touch Fortune's fingers. Farewell.
	She that would alter services with thee,
		         THE FORTUNATE-UNHAPPY.'
	Daylight and champaign discovers not more: this is
	open. I will be proud, I will read politic authors,
	I will baffle Sir Toby, I will wash off gross
	acquaintance, I will be point-devise the very man.
	I do not now fool myself, to let imagination jade
	me; for every reason excites to this, that my lady
	loves me. She did commend my yellow stockings of
	late, she did praise my leg being cross-gartered;
	and in this she manifests herself to my love, and
	with a kind of injunction drives me to these habits
	of her liking. I thank my stars I am happy. I will
	be strange, stout, in yellow stockings, and
	cross-gartered, even with the swiftness of putting
	on. Jove and my stars be praised! Here is yet a
	postscript.

	[Reads]

	'Thou canst not choose but know who I am. If thou
	entertainest my love, let it appear in thy smiling;
	thy smiles become thee well; therefore in my
	presence still smile, dear my sweet, I prithee.'
	Jove, I thank thee: I will smile; I will do
	everything that thou wilt have me.

	[Exit]

FABIAN	I will not give my part of this sport for a pension
	of thousands to be paid from the Sophy.

SIR TOBY BELCH	I could marry this wench for this device.

SIR ANDREW	So could I too.

SIR TOBY BELCH	And ask no other dowry with her but such another jest.

SIR ANDREW	Nor I neither.

FABIAN	Here comes my noble gull-catcher.

	[Re-enter MARIA]

SIR TOBY BELCH	Wilt thou set thy foot o' my neck?

SIR ANDREW	Or o' mine either?

SIR TOBY BELCH	Shall I play my freedom at traytrip, and become thy
	bond-slave?

SIR ANDREW	I' faith, or I either?

SIR TOBY BELCH	Why, thou hast put him in such a dream, that when
	the image of it leaves him he must run mad.

MARIA	Nay, but say true; does it work upon him?

SIR TOBY BELCH	Like aqua-vitae with a midwife.

MARIA	If you will then see the fruits of the sport, mark
	his first approach before my lady: he will come to
	her in yellow stockings, and 'tis a colour she
	abhors, and cross-gartered, a fashion she detests;
	and he will smile upon her, which will now be so
	unsuitable to her disposition, being addicted to a
	melancholy as she is, that it cannot but turn him
	into a notable contempt. If you will see it, follow
	me.

SIR TOBY BELCH	To the gates of Tartar, thou most excellent devil of wit!

SIR ANDREW	I'll make one too.

	[Exeunt]




	TWELFTH NIGHT


ACT III



SCENE I	OLIVIA's garden.


	[Enter VIOLA, and Clown with a tabour]

VIOLA	Save thee, friend, and thy music: dost thou live by
	thy tabour?

Clown	No, sir, I live by the church.

VIOLA	Art thou a churchman?

Clown	No such matter, sir: I do live by the church; for
	I do live at my house, and my house doth stand by
	the church.

VIOLA	So thou mayst say, the king lies by a beggar, if a
	beggar dwell near him; or, the church stands by thy
	tabour, if thy tabour stand by the church.

Clown	You have said, sir. To see this age! A sentence is
	but a cheveril glove to a good wit: how quickly the
	wrong side may be turned outward!

VIOLA	Nay, that's certain; they that dally nicely with
	words may quickly make them wanton.

Clown	I would, therefore, my sister had had no name, sir.

VIOLA	Why, man?

Clown	Why, sir, her name's a word; and to dally with that
	word might make my sister wanton. But indeed words
	are very rascals since bonds disgraced them.

VIOLA	Thy reason, man?

Clown	Troth, sir, I can yield you none without words; and
	words are grown so false, I am loath to prove
	reason with them.

VIOLA	I warrant thou art a merry fellow and carest for nothing.

Clown	Not so, sir, I do care for something; but in my
	conscience, sir, I do not care for you: if that be
	to care for nothing, sir, I would it would make you invisible.

VIOLA	Art not thou the Lady Olivia's fool?

Clown	No, indeed, sir; the Lady Olivia has no folly: she
	will keep no fool, sir, till she be married; and
	fools are as like husbands as pilchards are to
	herrings; the husband's the bigger: I am indeed not
	her fool, but her corrupter of words.

VIOLA	I saw thee late at the Count Orsino's.

Clown	Foolery, sir, does walk about the orb like the sun,
	it shines every where. I would be sorry, sir, but
	the fool should be as oft with your master as with
	my mistress: I think I saw your wisdom there.

VIOLA	Nay, an thou pass upon me, I'll no more with thee.
	Hold, there's expenses for thee.

Clown	Now Jove, in his next commodity of hair, send thee a beard!

VIOLA	By my troth, I'll tell thee, I am almost sick for
	one;

	[Aside]

	though I would not have it grow on my chin. Is thy
	lady within?

Clown	Would not a pair of these have bred, sir?

VIOLA	Yes, being kept together and put to use.

Clown	I would play Lord Pandarus of Phrygia, sir, to bring
	a Cressida to this Troilus.

VIOLA	I understand you, sir; 'tis well begged.

Clown	The matter, I hope, is not great, sir, begging but
	a beggar: Cressida was a beggar. My lady is
	within, sir. I will construe to them whence you
	come; who you are and what you would are out of my
	welkin, I might say 'element,' but the word is over-worn.

	[Exit]

VIOLA	This fellow is wise enough to play the fool;
	And to do that well craves a kind of wit:
	He must observe their mood on whom he jests,
	The quality of persons, and the time,
	And, like the haggard, cheque at every feather
	That comes before his eye. This is a practise
	As full of labour as a wise man's art
	For folly that he wisely shows is fit;
	But wise men, folly-fall'n, quite taint their wit.

	[Enter SIR TOBY BELCH, and SIR ANDREW]

SIR TOBY BELCH	Save you, gentleman.

VIOLA	And you, sir.

SIR ANDREW	Dieu vous garde, monsieur.

VIOLA	Et vous aussi; votre serviteur.

SIR ANDREW	I hope, sir, you are; and I am yours.

SIR TOBY BELCH	Will you encounter the house? my niece is desirous
	you should enter, if your trade be to her.

VIOLA	I am bound to your niece, sir; I mean, she is the
	list of my voyage.

SIR TOBY BELCH	Taste your legs, sir; put them to motion.

VIOLA	My legs do better understand me, sir, than I
	understand what you mean by bidding me taste my legs.

SIR TOBY BELCH	I mean, to go, sir, to enter.

VIOLA	I will answer you with gait and entrance. But we
	are prevented.

	[Enter OLIVIA and MARIA]

	Most excellent accomplished lady, the heavens rain
	odours on you!

SIR ANDREW	That youth's a rare courtier: 'Rain odours;' well.

VIOLA	My matter hath no voice, to your own most pregnant
	and vouchsafed ear.

SIR ANDREW	'Odours,' 'pregnant' and 'vouchsafed:' I'll get 'em
	all three all ready.

OLIVIA	Let the garden door be shut, and leave me to my hearing.

	[Exeunt SIR TOBY BELCH, SIR ANDREW, and MARIA]

	Give me your hand, sir.

VIOLA	My duty, madam, and most humble service.

OLIVIA	What is your name?

VIOLA	Cesario is your servant's name, fair princess.

OLIVIA	My servant, sir! 'Twas never merry world
	Since lowly feigning was call'd compliment:
	You're servant to the Count Orsino, youth.

VIOLA	And he is yours, and his must needs be yours:
	Your servant's servant is your servant, madam.

OLIVIA	For him, I think not on him: for his thoughts,
	Would they were blanks, rather than fill'd with me!

VIOLA	Madam, I come to whet your gentle thoughts
	On his behalf.

OLIVIA	                  O, by your leave, I pray you,
	I bade you never speak again of him:
	But, would you undertake another suit,
	I had rather hear you to solicit that
	Than music from the spheres.

VIOLA	Dear lady,--

OLIVIA	Give me leave, beseech you. I did send,
	After the last enchantment you did here,
	A ring in chase of you: so did I abuse
	Myself, my servant and, I fear me, you:
	Under your hard construction must I sit,
	To force that on you, in a shameful cunning,
	Which you knew none of yours: what might you think?
	Have you not set mine honour at the stake
	And baited it with all the unmuzzled thoughts
	That tyrannous heart can think? To one of your receiving
	Enough is shown: a cypress, not a bosom,
	Hideth my heart. So, let me hear you speak.

VIOLA	I pity you.

OLIVIA	          That's a degree to love.

VIOLA	No, not a grize; for 'tis a vulgar proof,
	That very oft we pity enemies.

OLIVIA	Why, then, methinks 'tis time to smile again.
	O, world, how apt the poor are to be proud!
	If one should be a prey, how much the better
	To fall before the lion than the wolf!

	[Clock strikes]

	The clock upbraids me with the waste of time.
	Be not afraid, good youth, I will not have you:
	And yet, when wit and youth is come to harvest,
	Your were is alike to reap a proper man:
	There lies your way, due west.

VIOLA	Then westward-ho! Grace and good disposition
	Attend your ladyship!
	You'll nothing, madam, to my lord by me?

OLIVIA	Stay:
	I prithee, tell me what thou thinkest of me.

VIOLA	That you do think you are not what you are.

OLIVIA	If I think so, I think the same of you.

VIOLA	Then think you right: I am not what I am.

OLIVIA	I would you were as I would have you be!

VIOLA	Would it be better, madam, than I am?
	I wish it might, for now I am your fool.

OLIVIA	O, what a deal of scorn looks beautiful
	In the contempt and anger of his lip!
	A murderous guilt shows not itself more soon
	Than love that would seem hid: love's night is noon.
	Cesario, by the roses of the spring,
	By maidhood, honour, truth and every thing,
	I love thee so, that, maugre all thy pride,
	Nor wit nor reason can my passion hide.
	Do not extort thy reasons from this clause,
	For that I woo, thou therefore hast no cause,
	But rather reason thus with reason fetter,
	Love sought is good, but given unsought better.

VIOLA	By innocence I swear, and by my youth
	I have one heart, one bosom and one truth,
	And that no woman has; nor never none
	Shall mistress be of it, save I alone.
	And so adieu, good madam: never more
	Will I my master's tears to you deplore.

OLIVIA	Yet come again; for thou perhaps mayst move
	That heart, which now abhors, to like his love.

	[Exeunt]




	TWELFTH NIGHT


ACT III



SCENE II	OLIVIA's house.


	[Enter SIR TOBY BELCH, SIR ANDREW, and FABIAN]

SIR ANDREW	No, faith, I'll not stay a jot longer.

SIR TOBY BELCH	Thy reason, dear venom, give thy reason.

FABIAN	You must needs yield your reason, Sir Andrew.

SIR ANDREW	Marry, I saw your niece do more favours to the
	count's serving-man than ever she bestowed upon me;
	I saw't i' the orchard.

SIR TOBY BELCH	Did she see thee the while, old boy? tell me that.

SIR ANDREW	As plain as I see you now.

FABIAN	This was a great argument of love in her toward you.

SIR ANDREW	'Slight, will you make an ass o' me?

FABIAN	I will prove it legitimate, sir, upon the oaths of
	judgment and reason.

SIR TOBY BELCH	And they have been grand-jury-men since before Noah
	was a sailor.

FABIAN	She did show favour to the youth in your sight only
	to exasperate you, to awake your dormouse valour, to
	put fire in your heart and brimstone in your liver.
	You should then have accosted her; and with some
	excellent jests, fire-new from the mint, you should
	have banged the youth into dumbness. This was
	looked for at your hand, and this was balked: the
	double gilt of this opportunity you let time wash
	off, and you are now sailed into the north of my
	lady's opinion; where you will hang like an icicle
	on a Dutchman's beard, unless you do redeem it by
	some laudable attempt either of valour or policy.

SIR ANDREW	An't be any way, it must be with valour; for policy
	I hate: I had as lief be a Brownist as a
	politician.

SIR TOBY BELCH	Why, then, build me thy fortunes upon the basis of
	valour. Challenge me the count's youth to fight
	with him; hurt him in eleven places: my niece shall
	take note of it; and assure thyself, there is no
	love-broker in the world can more prevail in man's
	commendation with woman than report of valour.

FABIAN	There is no way but this, Sir Andrew.

SIR ANDREW	Will either of you bear me a challenge to him?

SIR TOBY BELCH	Go, write it in a martial hand; be curst and brief;
	it is no matter how witty, so it be eloquent and fun
	of invention: taunt him with the licence of ink:
	if thou thou'st him some thrice, it shall not be
	amiss; and as many lies as will lie in thy sheet of
	paper, although the sheet were big enough for the
	bed of Ware in England, set 'em down: go, about it.
	Let there be gall enough in thy ink, though thou
	write with a goose-pen, no matter: about it.

SIR ANDREW	Where shall I find you?

SIR TOBY BELCH	We'll call thee at the cubiculo: go.

	[Exit SIR ANDREW]

FABIAN	This is a dear manikin to you, Sir Toby.

SIR TOBY BELCH	I have been dear to him, lad, some two thousand
	strong, or so.

FABIAN	We shall have a rare letter from him: but you'll
	not deliver't?

SIR TOBY BELCH	Never trust me, then; and by all means stir on the
	youth to an answer. I think oxen and wainropes
	cannot hale them together. For Andrew, if he were
	opened, and you find so much blood in his liver as
	will clog the foot of a flea, I'll eat the rest of
	the anatomy.

FABIAN	And his opposite, the youth, bears in his visage no
	great presage of cruelty.

	[Enter MARIA]

SIR TOBY BELCH	Look, where the youngest wren of nine comes.

MARIA	If you desire the spleen, and will laugh yourself
	into stitches, follow me. Yond gull Malvolio is
	turned heathen, a very renegado; for there is no
	Christian, that means to be saved by believing
	rightly, can ever believe such impossible passages
	of grossness. He's in yellow stockings.

SIR TOBY BELCH	And cross-gartered?

MARIA	Most villanously; like a pedant that keeps a school
	i' the church. I have dogged him, like his
	murderer. He does obey every point of the letter
	that I dropped to betray him: he does smile his
	face into more lines than is in the new map with the
	augmentation of the Indies: you have not seen such
	a thing as 'tis. I can hardly forbear hurling things
	at him. I know my lady will strike him: if she do,
	he'll smile and take't for a great favour.

SIR TOBY BELCH	Come, bring us, bring us where he is.

	[Exeunt]




	TWELFTH NIGHT


ACT III



SCENE III	A street.


	[Enter SEBASTIAN and ANTONIO]

SEBASTIAN	I would not by my will have troubled you;
	But, since you make your pleasure of your pains,
	I will no further chide you.

ANTONIO	I could not stay behind you: my desire,
	More sharp than filed steel, did spur me forth;
	And not all love to see you, though so much
	As might have drawn one to a longer voyage,
	But jealousy what might befall your travel,
	Being skilless in these parts; which to a stranger,
	Unguided and unfriended, often prove
	Rough and unhospitable: my willing love,
	The rather by these arguments of fear,
	Set forth in your pursuit.

SEBASTIAN	My kind Antonio,
	I can no other answer make but thanks,
	And thanks; and ever [         ] oft good turns
	Are shuffled off with such uncurrent pay:
	But, were my worth as is my conscience firm,
	You should find better dealing. What's to do?
	Shall we go see the reliques of this town?

ANTONIO	To-morrow, sir: best first go see your lodging.

SEBASTIAN	I am not weary, and 'tis long to night:
	I pray you, let us satisfy our eyes
	With the memorials and the things of fame
	That do renown this city.

ANTONIO	Would you'ld pardon me;
	I do not without danger walk these streets:
	Once, in a sea-fight, 'gainst the count his galleys
	I did some service; of such note indeed,
	That were I ta'en here it would scarce be answer'd.

SEBASTIAN	Belike you slew great number of his people.

ANTONIO	The offence is not of such a bloody nature;
	Albeit the quality of the time and quarrel
	Might well have given us bloody argument.
	It might have since been answer'd in repaying
	What we took from them; which, for traffic's sake,
	Most of our city did: only myself stood out;
	For which, if I be lapsed in this place,
	I shall pay dear.

SEBASTIAN	                  Do not then walk too open.

ANTONIO	It doth not fit me. Hold, sir, here's my purse.
	In the south suburbs, at the Elephant,
	Is best to lodge: I will bespeak our diet,
	Whiles you beguile the time and feed your knowledge
	With viewing of the town: there shall you have me.

SEBASTIAN	Why I your purse?

ANTONIO	Haply your eye shall light upon some toy
	You have desire to purchase; and your store,
	I think, is not for idle markets, sir.

SEBASTIAN	I'll be your purse-bearer and leave you
	For an hour.

ANTONIO	To the Elephant.

SEBASTIAN	                  I do remember.

	[Exeunt]




	TWELFTH NIGHT


ACT III



SCENE IV	OLIVIA's garden.


	[Enter OLIVIA and MARIA]

OLIVIA	I have sent after him: he says he'll come;
	How shall I feast him? what bestow of him?
	For youth is bought more oft than begg'd or borrow'd.
	I speak too loud.
	Where is Malvolio? he is sad and civil,
	And suits well for a servant with my fortunes:
	Where is Malvolio?

MARIA	He's coming, madam; but in very strange manner. He
	is, sure, possessed, madam.

OLIVIA	Why, what's the matter? does he rave?

MARIA	No. madam, he does nothing but smile: your
	ladyship were best to have some guard about you, if
	he come; for, sure, the man is tainted in's wits.

OLIVIA	Go call him hither.

	[Exit MARIA]

	I am as mad as he,
	If sad and merry madness equal be.

	[Re-enter MARIA, with MALVOLIO]

	How now, Malvolio!

MALVOLIO	Sweet lady, ho, ho.

OLIVIA	Smilest thou?
	I sent for thee upon a sad occasion.

MALVOLIO	Sad, lady! I could be sad: this does make some
	obstruction in the blood, this cross-gartering; but
	what of that? if it please the eye of one, it is
	with me as the very true sonnet is, 'Please one, and
	please all.'

OLIVIA	Why, how dost thou, man? what is the matter with thee?

MALVOLIO	Not black in my mind, though yellow in my legs. It
	did come to his hands, and commands shall be
	executed: I think we do know the sweet Roman hand.

OLIVIA	Wilt thou go to bed, Malvolio?

MALVOLIO	To bed! ay, sweet-heart, and I'll come to thee.

OLIVIA	God comfort thee! Why dost thou smile so and kiss
	thy hand so oft?

MARIA	How do you, Malvolio?

MALVOLIO	At your request! yes; nightingales answer daws.

MARIA	Why appear you with this ridiculous boldness before my lady?

MALVOLIO	'Be not afraid of greatness:' 'twas well writ.

OLIVIA	What meanest thou by that, Malvolio?

MALVOLIO	'Some are born great,'--

OLIVIA	Ha!

MALVOLIO	'Some achieve greatness,'--

OLIVIA	What sayest thou?

MALVOLIO	'And some have greatness thrust upon them.'

OLIVIA	Heaven restore thee!

MALVOLIO	'Remember who commended thy yellow stockings,'--

OLIVIA	Thy yellow stockings!

MALVOLIO	'And wished to see thee cross-gartered.'

OLIVIA	Cross-gartered!

MALVOLIO	'Go to thou art made, if thou desirest to be so;'--

OLIVIA	Am I made?

MALVOLIO	'If not, let me see thee a servant still.'

OLIVIA	Why, this is very midsummer madness.

	[Enter Servant]

Servant	Madam, the young gentleman of the Count Orsino's is
	returned: I could hardly entreat him back: he
	attends your ladyship's pleasure.

OLIVIA	I'll come to him.

	[Exit Servant]

	Good Maria, let this fellow be looked to. Where's
	my cousin Toby? Let some of my people have a special
	care of him: I would not have him miscarry for the
	half of my dowry.

	[Exeunt OLIVIA and MARIA]

MALVOLIO	O, ho! do you come near me now? no worse man than
	Sir Toby to look to me! This concurs directly with
	the letter: she sends him on purpose, that I may
	appear stubborn to him; for she incites me to that
	in the letter. 'Cast thy humble slough,' says she;
	'be opposite with a kinsman, surly with servants;
	let thy tongue tang with arguments of state; put
	thyself into the trick of singularity;' and
	consequently sets down the manner how; as, a sad
	face, a reverend carriage, a slow tongue, in the
	habit of some sir of note, and so forth. I have
	limed her; but it is Jove's doing, and Jove make me
	thankful! And when she went away now, 'Let this
	fellow be looked to:' fellow! not Malvolio, nor
	after my degree, but fellow. Why, every thing
	adheres together, that no dram of a scruple, no
	scruple of a scruple, no obstacle, no incredulous
	or unsafe circumstance--What can be said? Nothing
	that can be can come between me and the full
	prospect of my hopes. Well, Jove, not I, is the
	doer of this, and he is to be thanked.

	[Re-enter MARIA, with SIR TOBY BELCH and FABIAN]

SIR TOBY BELCH	Which way is he, in the name of sanctity? If all
	the devils of hell be drawn in little, and Legion
	himself possessed him, yet I'll speak to him.

FABIAN	Here he is, here he is. How is't with you, sir?
	how is't with you, man?

MALVOLIO	Go off; I discard you: let me enjoy my private: go
	off.

MARIA	Lo, how hollow the fiend speaks within him! did not
	I tell you? Sir Toby, my lady prays you to have a
	care of him.

MALVOLIO	Ah, ha! does she so?

SIR TOBY BELCH	Go to, go to; peace, peace; we must deal gently
	with him: let me alone. How do you, Malvolio? how
	is't with you? What, man! defy the devil:
	consider, he's an enemy to mankind.

MALVOLIO	Do you know what you say?

MARIA	La you, an you speak ill of the devil, how he takes
	it at heart! Pray God, he be not bewitched!

FABIAN	Carry his water to the wise woman.

MARIA	Marry, and it shall be done to-morrow morning, if I
	live. My lady would not lose him for more than I'll say.

MALVOLIO	How now, mistress!

MARIA	O Lord!

SIR TOBY BELCH	Prithee, hold thy peace; this is not the way: do
	you not see you move him? let me alone with him.

FABIAN	No way but gentleness; gently, gently: the fiend is
	rough, and will not be roughly used.

SIR TOBY BELCH	Why, how now, my bawcock! how dost thou, chuck?

MALVOLIO	Sir!

SIR TOBY BELCH	Ay, Biddy, come with me. What, man! 'tis not for
	gravity to play at cherry-pit with Satan: hang
	him, foul collier!

MARIA	Get him to say his prayers, good Sir Toby, get him to pray.

MALVOLIO	My prayers, minx!

MARIA	No, I warrant you, he will not hear of godliness.

MALVOLIO	Go, hang yourselves all! you are idle shallow
	things: I am not of your element: you shall know
	more hereafter.

	[Exit]

SIR TOBY BELCH	Is't possible?

FABIAN	If this were played upon a stage now, I could
	condemn it as an improbable fiction.

SIR TOBY BELCH	His very genius hath taken the infection of the device, man.

MARIA	Nay, pursue him now, lest the device take air and taint.

FABIAN	Why, we shall make him mad indeed.

MARIA	The house will be the quieter.

SIR TOBY BELCH	Come, we'll have him in a dark room and bound. My
	niece is already in the belief that he's mad: we
	may carry it thus, for our pleasure and his penance,
	till our very pastime, tired out of breath, prompt
	us to have mercy on him: at which time we will
	bring the device to the bar and crown thee for a
	finder of madmen. But see, but see.

	[Enter SIR ANDREW]

FABIAN	More matter for a May morning.

SIR ANDREW	Here's the challenge, read it: warrant there's
	vinegar and pepper in't.

FABIAN	Is't so saucy?

SIR ANDREW	Ay, is't, I warrant him: do but read.

SIR TOBY BELCH	Give me.

	[Reads]

	'Youth, whatsoever thou art, thou art but a scurvy fellow.'

FABIAN	Good, and valiant.

SIR TOBY BELCH	[Reads]  'Wonder not, nor admire not in thy mind,
	why I do call thee so, for I will show thee no reason for't.'

FABIAN	A good note; that keeps you from the blow of the law.

SIR TOBY BELCH	[Reads]  'Thou comest to the lady Olivia, and in my
	sight she uses thee kindly: but thou liest in thy
	throat; that is not the matter I challenge thee for.'

FABIAN	Very brief, and to exceeding good sense--less.

SIR TOBY BELCH	[Reads]  'I will waylay thee going home; where if it
	be thy chance to kill me,'--

FABIAN	Good.

SIR TOBY BELCH	[Reads]  'Thou killest me like a rogue and a villain.'

FABIAN	Still you keep o' the windy side of the law: good.

SIR TOBY BELCH	[Reads]  'Fare thee well; and God have mercy upon
	one of our souls! He may have mercy upon mine; but
	my hope is better, and so look to thyself. Thy
	friend, as thou usest him, and thy sworn enemy,
		                  ANDREW AGUECHEEK.
	If this letter move him not, his legs cannot:
	I'll give't him.

MARIA	You may have very fit occasion for't: he is now in
	some commerce with my lady, and will by and by depart.

SIR TOBY BELCH	Go, Sir Andrew: scout me for him at the corner the
	orchard like a bum-baily: so soon as ever thou seest
	him, draw; and, as thou drawest swear horrible; for
	it comes to pass oft that a terrible oath, with a
	swaggering accent sharply twanged off, gives manhood
	more approbation than ever proof itself would have
	earned him. Away!

SIR ANDREW	Nay, let me alone for swearing.

	[Exit]

SIR TOBY BELCH	Now will not I deliver his letter: for the behavior
	of the young gentleman gives him out to be of good
	capacity and breeding; his employment between his
	lord and my niece confirms no less: therefore this
	letter, being so excellently ignorant, will breed no
	terror in the youth: he will find it comes from a
	clodpole. But, sir, I will deliver his challenge by
	word of mouth; set upon Aguecheek a notable report
	of valour; and drive the gentleman, as I know his
	youth will aptly receive it, into a most hideous
	opinion of his rage, skill, fury and impetuosity.
	This will so fright them both that they will kill
	one another by the look, like cockatrices.

	[Re-enter OLIVIA, with VIOLA]

FABIAN	Here he comes with your niece: give them way till
	he take leave, and presently after him.

SIR TOBY BELCH	I will meditate the while upon some horrid message
	for a challenge.

	[Exeunt SIR TOBY BELCH, FABIAN, and MARIA]

OLIVIA	I have said too much unto a heart of stone
	And laid mine honour too unchary out:
	There's something in me that reproves my fault;
	But such a headstrong potent fault it is,
	That it but mocks reproof.

VIOLA	With the same 'havior that your passion bears
	Goes on my master's grief.

OLIVIA	Here, wear this jewel for me, 'tis my picture;
	Refuse it not; it hath no tongue to vex you;
	And I beseech you come again to-morrow.
	What shall you ask of me that I'll deny,
	That honour saved may upon asking give?

VIOLA	Nothing but this; your true love for my master.

OLIVIA	How with mine honour may I give him that
	Which I have given to you?

VIOLA	I will acquit you.

OLIVIA	Well, come again to-morrow: fare thee well:
	A fiend like thee might bear my soul to hell.

	[Exit]

	[Re-enter SIR TOBY BELCH and FABIAN]

SIR TOBY BELCH	Gentleman, God save thee.

VIOLA	And you, sir.

SIR TOBY BELCH	That defence thou hast, betake thee to't: of what
	nature the wrongs are thou hast done him, I know
	not; but thy intercepter, full of despite, bloody as
	the hunter, attends thee at the orchard-end:
	dismount thy tuck, be yare in thy preparation, for
	thy assailant is quick, skilful and deadly.

VIOLA	You mistake, sir; I am sure no man hath any quarrel
	to me: my remembrance is very free and clear from
	any image of offence done to any man.

SIR TOBY BELCH	You'll find it otherwise, I assure you: therefore,
	if you hold your life at any price, betake you to
	your guard; for your opposite hath in him what
	youth, strength, skill and wrath can furnish man withal.

VIOLA	I pray you, sir, what is he?

SIR TOBY BELCH	He is knight, dubbed with unhatched rapier and on
	carpet consideration; but he is a devil in private
	brawl: souls and bodies hath he divorced three; and
	his incensement at this moment is so implacable,
	that satisfaction can be none but by pangs of death
	and sepulchre. Hob, nob, is his word; give't or take't.

VIOLA	I will return again into the house and desire some
	conduct of the lady. I am no fighter. I have heard
	of some kind of men that put quarrels purposely on
	others, to taste their valour: belike this is a man
	of that quirk.

SIR TOBY BELCH	Sir, no; his indignation derives itself out of a
	very competent injury: therefore, get you on and
	give him his desire. Back you shall not to the
	house, unless you undertake that with me which with
	as much safety you might answer him: therefore, on,
	or strip your sword stark naked; for meddle you
	must, that's certain, or forswear to wear iron about you.

VIOLA	This is as uncivil as strange. I beseech you, do me
	this courteous office, as to know of the knight what
	my offence to him is: it is something of my
	negligence, nothing of my purpose.

SIR TOBY BELCH	I will do so. Signior Fabian, stay you by this
	gentleman till my return.

	[Exit]

VIOLA	Pray you, sir, do you know of this matter?

FABIAN	I know the knight is incensed against you, even to a
	mortal arbitrement; but nothing of the circumstance more.

VIOLA	I beseech you, what manner of man is he?

FABIAN	Nothing of that wonderful promise, to read him by
	his form, as you are like to find him in the proof
	of his valour. He is, indeed, sir, the most skilful,
	bloody and fatal opposite that you could possibly
	have found in any part of Illyria. Will you walk
	towards him? I will make your peace with him if I
	can.

VIOLA	I shall be much bound to you for't: I am one that
	had rather go with sir priest than sir knight: I
	care not who knows so much of my mettle.

	[Exeunt]

	[Re-enter SIR TOBY BELCH, with SIR ANDREW]

SIR TOBY BELCH	Why, man, he's a very devil; I have not seen such a
	firago. I had a pass with him, rapier, scabbard and
	all, and he gives me the stuck in with such a mortal
	motion, that it is inevitable; and on the answer, he
	pays you as surely as your feet hit the ground they
	step on. They say he has been fencer to the Sophy.

SIR ANDREW	Pox on't, I'll not meddle with him.

SIR TOBY BELCH	Ay, but he will not now be pacified: Fabian can
	scarce hold him yonder.

SIR ANDREW	Plague on't, an I thought he had been valiant and so
	cunning in fence, I'ld have seen him damned ere I'ld
	have challenged him. Let him let the matter slip,
	and I'll give him my horse, grey Capilet.

SIR TOBY BELCH	I'll make the motion: stand here, make a good show
	on't: this shall end without the perdition of souls.

	[Aside]

	Marry, I'll ride your horse as well as I ride you.

	[Re-enter FABIAN and VIOLA]

	[To FABIAN]

	I have his horse to take up the quarrel:
	I have persuaded him the youth's a devil.

FABIAN	He is as horribly conceited of him; and pants and
	looks pale, as if a bear were at his heels.

SIR TOBY BELCH	[To VIOLA]  There's no remedy, sir; he will fight
	with you for's oath sake: marry, he hath better
	bethought him of his quarrel, and he finds that now
	scarce to be worth talking of: therefore draw, for
	the supportance of his vow; he protests he will not hurt you.

VIOLA	[Aside]  Pray God defend me! A little thing would
	make me tell them how much I lack of a man.

FABIAN	Give ground, if you see him furious.

SIR TOBY BELCH	Come, Sir Andrew, there's no remedy; the gentleman
	will, for his honour's sake, have one bout with you;
	he cannot by the duello avoid it: but he has
	promised me, as he is a gentleman and a soldier, he
	will not hurt you. Come on; to't.

SIR ANDREW	Pray God, he keep his oath!

VIOLA	I do assure you, 'tis against my will.

	[They draw]

	[Enter ANTONIO]

ANTONIO	Put up your sword. If this young gentleman
	Have done offence, I take the fault on me:
	If you offend him, I for him defy you.

SIR TOBY BELCH	You, sir! why, what are you?

ANTONIO	One, sir, that for his love dares yet do more
	Than you have heard him brag to you he will.

SIR TOBY BELCH	Nay, if you be an undertaker, I am for you.

	[They draw]

	[Enter Officers]

FABIAN	O good Sir Toby, hold! here come the officers.

SIR TOBY BELCH	I'll be with you anon.

VIOLA	Pray, sir, put your sword up, if you please.

SIR ANDREW	Marry, will I, sir; and, for that I promised you,
	I'll be as good as my word: he will bear you easily
	and reins well.

First Officer	This is the man; do thy office.

Second Officer	Antonio, I arrest thee at the suit of Count Orsino.

ANTONIO	You do mistake me, sir.

First Officer	No, sir, no jot; I know your favour well,
	Though now you have no sea-cap on your head.
	Take him away: he knows I know him well.

ANTONIO	I must obey.

	[To VIOLA]

	This comes with seeking you:
	But there's no remedy; I shall answer it.
	What will you do, now my necessity
	Makes me to ask you for my purse? It grieves me
	Much more for what I cannot do for you
	Than what befalls myself. You stand amazed;
	But be of comfort.

Second Officer	Come, sir, away.

ANTONIO	I must entreat of you some of that money.

VIOLA	What money, sir?
	For the fair kindness you have show'd me here,
	And, part, being prompted by your present trouble,
	Out of my lean and low ability
	I'll lend you something: my having is not much;
	I'll make division of my present with you:
	Hold, there's half my coffer.

ANTONIO	Will you deny me now?
	Is't possible that my deserts to you
	Can lack persuasion? Do not tempt my misery,
	Lest that it make me so unsound a man
	As to upbraid you with those kindnesses
	That I have done for you.

VIOLA	I know of none;
	Nor know I you by voice or any feature:
	I hate ingratitude more in a man
	Than lying, vainness, babbling, drunkenness,
	Or any taint of vice whose strong corruption
	Inhabits our frail blood.

ANTONIO	O heavens themselves!

Second Officer	Come, sir, I pray you, go.

ANTONIO	Let me speak a little. This youth that you see here
	I snatch'd one half out of the jaws of death,
	Relieved him with such sanctity of love,
	And to his image, which methought did promise
	Most venerable worth, did I devotion.

First Officer	What's that to us? The time goes by: away!

ANTONIO	But O how vile an idol proves this god
	Thou hast, Sebastian, done good feature shame.
	In nature there's no blemish but the mind;
	None can be call'd deform'd but the unkind:
	Virtue is beauty, but the beauteous evil
	Are empty trunks o'erflourish'd by the devil.

First Officer	The man grows mad: away with him! Come, come, sir.

ANTONIO	Lead me on.

	[Exit with Officers]

VIOLA	Methinks his words do from such passion fly,
	That he believes himself: so do not I.
	Prove true, imagination, O, prove true,
	That I, dear brother, be now ta'en for you!

SIR TOBY BELCH	Come hither, knight; come hither, Fabian: we'll
	whisper o'er a couplet or two of most sage saws.

VIOLA	He named Sebastian: I my brother know
	Yet living in my glass; even such and so
	In favour was my brother, and he went
	Still in this fashion, colour, ornament,
	For him I imitate: O, if it prove,
	Tempests are kind and salt waves fresh in love.

	[Exit]

SIR TOBY BELCH	A very dishonest paltry boy, and more a coward than
	a hare: his dishonesty appears in leaving his
	friend here in necessity and denying him; and for
	his cowardship, ask Fabian.

FABIAN	A coward, a most devout coward, religious in it.

SIR ANDREW	'Slid, I'll after him again and beat him.

SIR TOBY BELCH	Do; cuff him soundly, but never draw thy sword.

SIR ANDREW	An I do not,--

FABIAN	Come, let's see the event.

SIR TOBY BELCH	I dare lay any money 'twill be nothing yet.

	[Exeunt]




	TWELFTH NIGHT


ACT IV



SCENE I	Before OLIVIA's house.


	[Enter SEBASTIAN and Clown]

Clown	Will you make me believe that I am not sent for you?

SEBASTIAN	Go to, go to, thou art a foolish fellow:
	Let me be clear of thee.

Clown	Well held out, i' faith! No, I do not know you; nor
	I am not sent to you by my lady, to bid you come
	speak with her; nor your name is not Master Cesario;
	nor this is not my nose neither. Nothing that is so is so.

SEBASTIAN	I prithee, vent thy folly somewhere else: Thou
	know'st not me.

Clown	Vent my folly! he has heard that word of some
	great man and now applies it to a fool. Vent my
	folly! I am afraid this great lubber, the world,
	will prove a cockney. I prithee now, ungird thy
	strangeness and tell me what I shall vent to my
	lady: shall I vent to her that thou art coming?

SEBASTIAN	I prithee, foolish Greek, depart from me: There's
	money for thee: if you tarry longer, I shall give
	worse payment.

Clown	By my troth, thou hast an open hand. These wise men
	that give fools money get themselves a good
	report--after fourteen years' purchase.

	[Enter SIR ANDREW, SIR TOBY BELCH, and FABIAN]

SIR ANDREW	Now, sir, have I met you again? there's for you.

SEBASTIAN	Why, there's for thee, and there, and there. Are all
	the people mad?

SIR TOBY BELCH	Hold, sir, or I'll throw your dagger o'er the house.

Clown	This will I tell my lady straight: I would not be
	in some of your coats for two pence.

	[Exit]

SIR TOBY BELCH	Come on, sir; hold.

SIR ANDREW	Nay, let him alone: I'll go another way to work
	with him; I'll have an action of battery against
	him, if there be any law in Illyria: though I
	struck him first, yet it's no matter for that.

SEBASTIAN	Let go thy hand.

SIR TOBY BELCH	Come, sir, I will not let you go. Come, my young
	soldier, put up your iron: you are well fleshed; come on.

SEBASTIAN	I will be free from thee. What wouldst thou now? If
	thou darest tempt me further, draw thy sword.

SIR TOBY BELCH	What, what? Nay, then I must have an ounce or two
	of this malapert blood from you.

	[Enter OLIVIA]

OLIVIA	Hold, Toby; on thy life I charge thee, hold!

SIR TOBY BELCH	Madam!

OLIVIA	Will it be ever thus? Ungracious wretch,
	Fit for the mountains and the barbarous caves,
	Where manners ne'er were preach'd! out of my sight!
	Be not offended, dear Cesario.
	Rudesby, be gone!

	[Exeunt SIR TOBY BELCH, SIR ANDREW, and FABIAN]

	I prithee, gentle friend,
	Let thy fair wisdom, not thy passion, sway
	In this uncivil and thou unjust extent
	Against thy peace. Go with me to my house,
	And hear thou there how many fruitless pranks
	This ruffian hath botch'd up, that thou thereby
	Mayst smile at this: thou shalt not choose but go:
	Do not deny. Beshrew his soul for me,
	He started one poor heart of mine in thee.

SEBASTIAN	What relish is in this? how runs the stream?
	Or I am mad, or else this is a dream:
	Let fancy still my sense in Lethe steep;
	If it be thus to dream, still let me sleep!

OLIVIA	Nay, come, I prithee; would thou'ldst be ruled by me!

SEBASTIAN	Madam, I will.

OLIVIA	                  O, say so, and so be!

	[Exeunt]




	TWELFTH NIGHT


ACT IV



SCENE II	OLIVIA's house.


	[Enter MARIA and Clown]

MARIA	Nay, I prithee, put on this gown and this beard;
	make him believe thou art Sir Topas the curate: do
	it quickly; I'll call Sir Toby the whilst.

	[Exit]

Clown	Well, I'll put it on, and I will dissemble myself
	in't; and I would I were the first that ever
	dissembled in such a gown. I am not tall enough to
	become the function well, nor lean enough to be
	thought a good student; but to be said an honest man
	and a good housekeeper goes as fairly as to say a
	careful man and a great scholar. The competitors enter.

	[Enter SIR TOBY BELCH and MARIA]

SIR TOBY BELCH	Jove bless thee, master Parson.

Clown	Bonos dies, Sir Toby: for, as the old hermit of
	Prague, that never saw pen and ink, very wittily
	said to a niece of King Gorboduc, 'That that is is;'
	so I, being Master Parson, am Master Parson; for,
	what is 'that' but 'that,' and 'is' but 'is'?

SIR TOBY BELCH	To him, Sir Topas.

Clown	What, ho, I say! peace in this prison!

SIR TOBY BELCH	The knave counterfeits well; a good knave.

MALVOLIO	[Within]  Who calls there?

Clown	Sir Topas the curate, who comes to visit Malvolio
	the lunatic.

MALVOLIO	Sir Topas, Sir Topas, good Sir Topas, go to my lady.

Clown	Out, hyperbolical fiend! how vexest thou this man!
	talkest thou nothing but of ladies?

SIR TOBY BELCH	Well said, Master Parson.

MALVOLIO	Sir Topas, never was man thus wronged: good Sir
	Topas, do not think I am mad: they have laid me
	here in hideous darkness.

Clown	Fie, thou dishonest Satan! I call thee by the most
	modest terms; for I am one of those gentle ones
	that will use the devil himself with courtesy:
	sayest thou that house is dark?

MALVOLIO	As hell, Sir Topas.

Clown	Why it hath bay windows transparent as barricadoes,
	and the clearstores toward the south north are as
	lustrous as ebony; and yet complainest thou of
	obstruction?

MALVOLIO	I am not mad, Sir Topas: I say to you, this house is dark.

Clown	Madman, thou errest: I say, there is no darkness
	but ignorance; in which thou art more puzzled than
	the Egyptians in their fog.

MALVOLIO	I say, this house is as dark as ignorance, though
	ignorance were as dark as hell; and I say, there
	was never man thus abused. I am no more mad than you
	are: make the trial of it in any constant question.

Clown	What is the opinion of Pythagoras concerning wild fowl?

MALVOLIO	That the soul of our grandam might haply inhabit a bird.

Clown	What thinkest thou of his opinion?

MALVOLIO	I think nobly of the soul, and no way approve his opinion.

Clown	Fare thee well. Remain thou still in darkness:
	thou shalt hold the opinion of Pythagoras ere I will
	allow of thy wits, and fear to kill a woodcock, lest
	thou dispossess the soul of thy grandam. Fare thee well.

MALVOLIO	Sir Topas, Sir Topas!

SIR TOBY BELCH	My most exquisite Sir Topas!

Clown	Nay, I am for all waters.

MARIA	Thou mightst have done this without thy beard and
	gown: he sees thee not.

SIR TOBY BELCH	To him in thine own voice, and bring me word how
	thou findest him: I would we were well rid of this
	knavery. If he may be conveniently delivered, I
	would he were, for I am now so far in offence with
	my niece that I cannot pursue with any safety this
	sport to the upshot. Come by and by to my chamber.

	[Exeunt SIR TOBY BELCH and MARIA]

Clown	[Singing]

	'Hey, Robin, jolly Robin,
	Tell me how thy lady does.'

MALVOLIO	Fool!

Clown	'My lady is unkind, perdy.'

MALVOLIO	Fool!

Clown	'Alas, why is she so?'

MALVOLIO	Fool, I say!

Clown	'She loves another'--Who calls, ha?

MALVOLIO	Good fool, as ever thou wilt deserve well at my
	hand, help me to a candle, and pen, ink and paper:
	as I am a gentleman, I will live to be thankful to
	thee for't.

Clown	Master Malvolio?

MALVOLIO	Ay, good fool.

Clown	Alas, sir, how fell you besides your five wits?

MALVOLIO	Fool, there was never a man so notoriously abused: I
	am as well in my wits, fool, as thou art.

Clown	But as well? then you are mad indeed, if you be no
	better in your wits than a fool.

MALVOLIO	They have here propertied me; keep me in darkness,
	send ministers to me, asses, and do all they can to
	face me out of my wits.

Clown	Advise you what you say; the minister is here.
	Malvolio, Malvolio, thy wits the heavens restore!
	endeavour thyself to sleep, and leave thy vain
	bibble babble.

MALVOLIO	Sir Topas!

Clown	Maintain no words with him, good fellow. Who, I,
	sir? not I, sir. God be wi' you, good Sir Topas.
	Merry, amen. I will, sir, I will.

MALVOLIO	Fool, fool, fool, I say!

Clown	Alas, sir, be patient. What say you sir? I am
	shent for speaking to you.

MALVOLIO	Good fool, help me to some light and some paper: I
	tell thee, I am as well in my wits as any man in Illyria.

Clown	Well-a-day that you were, sir

MALVOLIO	By this hand, I am. Good fool, some ink, paper and
	light; and convey what I will set down to my lady:
	it shall advantage thee more than ever the bearing
	of letter did.

Clown	I will help you to't. But tell me true, are you
	not mad indeed? or do you but counterfeit?

MALVOLIO	Believe me, I am not; I tell thee true.

Clown	Nay, I'll ne'er believe a madman till I see his
	brains. I will fetch you light and paper and ink.

MALVOLIO	Fool, I'll requite it in the highest degree: I
	prithee, be gone.

Clown	[Singing]

	I am gone, sir,
	And anon, sir,
	I'll be with you again,
	In a trice,
	Like to the old Vice,
	Your need to sustain;
	Who, with dagger of lath,
	In his rage and his wrath,
	Cries, ah, ha! to the devil:
	Like a mad lad,
	Pare thy nails, dad;
	Adieu, good man devil.

	[Exit]




	TWELFTH NIGHT


ACT IV



SCENE III	OLIVIA's garden.


	[Enter SEBASTIAN]

SEBASTIAN	This is the air; that is the glorious sun;
	This pearl she gave me, I do feel't and see't;
	And though 'tis wonder that enwraps me thus,
	Yet 'tis not madness. Where's Antonio, then?
	I could not find him at the Elephant:
	Yet there he was; and there I found this credit,
	That he did range the town to seek me out.
	His counsel now might do me golden service;
	For though my soul disputes well with my sense,
	That this may be some error, but no madness,
	Yet doth this accident and flood of fortune
	So far exceed all instance, all discourse,
	That I am ready to distrust mine eyes
	And wrangle with my reason that persuades me
	To any other trust but that I am mad
	Or else the lady's mad; yet, if 'twere so,
	She could not sway her house, command her followers,
	Take and give back affairs and their dispatch
	With such a smooth, discreet and stable bearing
	As I perceive she does: there's something in't
	That is deceiveable. But here the lady comes.

	[Enter OLIVIA and Priest]

OLIVIA	Blame not this haste of mine. If you mean well,
	Now go with me and with this holy man
	Into the chantry by: there, before him,
	And underneath that consecrated roof,
	Plight me the full assurance of your faith;
	That my most jealous and too doubtful soul
	May live at peace. He shall conceal it
	Whiles you are willing it shall come to note,
	What time we will our celebration keep
	According to my birth. What do you say?

SEBASTIAN	I'll follow this good man, and go with you;
	And, having sworn truth, ever will be true.

OLIVIA	Then lead the way, good father; and heavens so shine,
	That they may fairly note this act of mine!

	[Exeunt]




	TWELFTH NIGHT


ACT V



SCENE I	Before OLIVIA's house.


	[Enter Clown and FABIAN]

FABIAN	Now, as thou lovest me, let me see his letter.

Clown	Good Master Fabian, grant me another request.

FABIAN	Any thing.

Clown	Do not desire to see this letter.

FABIAN	This is, to give a dog, and in recompense desire my
	dog again.

	[Enter DUKE ORSINO, VIOLA, CURIO, and Lords]

DUKE ORSINO	Belong you to the Lady Olivia, friends?

Clown	Ay, sir; we are some of her trappings.

DUKE ORSINO	I know thee well; how dost thou, my good fellow?

Clown	Truly, sir, the better for my foes and the worse
	for my friends.

DUKE ORSINO	Just the contrary; the better for thy friends.

Clown	No, sir, the worse.

DUKE ORSINO	How can that be?

Clown	Marry, sir, they praise me and make an ass of me;
	now my foes tell me plainly I am an ass: so that by
	my foes, sir I profit in the knowledge of myself,
	and by my friends, I am abused: so that,
	conclusions to be as kisses, if your four negatives
	make your two affirmatives why then, the worse for
	my friends and the better for my foes.

DUKE ORSINO	Why, this is excellent.

Clown	By my troth, sir, no; though it please you to be
	one of my friends.

DUKE ORSINO	Thou shalt not be the worse for me: there's gold.

Clown	But that it would be double-dealing, sir, I would
	you could make it another.

DUKE ORSINO	O, you give me ill counsel.

Clown	Put your grace in your pocket, sir, for this once,
	and let your flesh and blood obey it.

DUKE ORSINO	Well, I will be so much a sinner, to be a
	double-dealer: there's another.

Clown	Primo, secundo, tertio, is a good play; and the old
	saying is, the third pays for all: the triplex,
	sir, is a good tripping measure; or the bells of
	Saint Bennet, sir, may put you in mind; one, two, three.

DUKE ORSINO	You can fool no more money out of me at this throw:
	if you will let your lady know I am here to speak
	with her, and bring her along with you, it may awake
	my bounty further.

Clown	Marry, sir, lullaby to your bounty till I come
	again. I go, sir; but I would not have you to think
	that my desire of having is the sin of covetousness:
	but, as you say, sir, let your bounty take a nap, I
	will awake it anon.

	[Exit]

VIOLA	Here comes the man, sir, that did rescue me.

	[Enter ANTONIO and Officers]

DUKE ORSINO	That face of his I do remember well;
	Yet, when I saw it last, it was besmear'd
	As black as Vulcan in the smoke of war:
	A bawbling vessel was he captain of,
	For shallow draught and bulk unprizable;
	With which such scathful grapple did he make
	With the most noble bottom of our fleet,
	That very envy and the tongue of loss
	Cried fame and honour on him. What's the matter?

First Officer	Orsino, this is that Antonio
	That took the Phoenix and her fraught from Candy;
	And this is he that did the Tiger board,
	When your young nephew Titus lost his leg:
	Here in the streets, desperate of shame and state,
	In private brabble did we apprehend him.

VIOLA	He did me kindness, sir, drew on my side;
	But in conclusion put strange speech upon me:
	I know not what 'twas but distraction.

DUKE ORSINO	Notable pirate! thou salt-water thief!
	What foolish boldness brought thee to their mercies,
	Whom thou, in terms so bloody and so dear,
	Hast made thine enemies?

ANTONIO	Orsino, noble sir,
	Be pleased that I shake off these names you give me:
	Antonio never yet was thief or pirate,
	Though I confess, on base and ground enough,
	Orsino's enemy. A witchcraft drew me hither:
	That most ingrateful boy there by your side,
	From the rude sea's enraged and foamy mouth
	Did I redeem; a wreck past hope he was:
	His life I gave him and did thereto add
	My love, without retention or restraint,
	All his in dedication; for his sake
	Did I expose myself, pure for his love,
	Into the danger of this adverse town;
	Drew to defend him when he was beset:
	Where being apprehended, his false cunning,
	Not meaning to partake with me in danger,
	Taught him to face me out of his acquaintance,
	And grew a twenty years removed thing
	While one would wink; denied me mine own purse,
	Which I had recommended to his use
	Not half an hour before.

VIOLA	How can this be?

DUKE ORSINO	When came he to this town?

ANTONIO	To-day, my lord; and for three months before,
	No interim, not a minute's vacancy,
	Both day and night did we keep company.

	[Enter OLIVIA and Attendants]

DUKE ORSINO	Here comes the countess: now heaven walks on earth.
	But for thee, fellow; fellow, thy words are madness:
	Three months this youth hath tended upon me;
	But more of that anon. Take him aside.

OLIVIA	What would my lord, but that he may not have,
	Wherein Olivia may seem serviceable?
	Cesario, you do not keep promise with me.

VIOLA	Madam!

DUKE ORSINO	Gracious Olivia,--

OLIVIA	What do you say, Cesario? Good my lord,--

VIOLA	My lord would speak; my duty hushes me.

OLIVIA	If it be aught to the old tune, my lord,
	It is as fat and fulsome to mine ear
	As howling after music.

DUKE ORSINO	Still so cruel?

OLIVIA	Still so constant, lord.

DUKE ORSINO	What, to perverseness? you uncivil lady,
	To whose ingrate and unauspicious altars
	My soul the faithfull'st offerings hath breathed out
	That e'er devotion tender'd! What shall I do?

OLIVIA	Even what it please my lord, that shall become him.

DUKE ORSINO	Why should I not, had I the heart to do it,
	Like to the Egyptian thief at point of death,
	Kill what I love?--a savage jealousy
	That sometimes savours nobly. But hear me this:
	Since you to non-regardance cast my faith,
	And that I partly know the instrument
	That screws me from my true place in your favour,
	Live you the marble-breasted tyrant still;
	But this your minion, whom I know you love,
	And whom, by heaven I swear, I tender dearly,
	Him will I tear out of that cruel eye,
	Where he sits crowned in his master's spite.
	Come, boy, with me; my thoughts are ripe in mischief:
	I'll sacrifice the lamb that I do love,
	To spite a raven's heart within a dove.

VIOLA	And I, most jocund, apt and willingly,
	To do you rest, a thousand deaths would die.

OLIVIA	Where goes Cesario?

VIOLA	After him I love
	More than I love these eyes, more than my life,
	More, by all mores, than e'er I shall love wife.
	If I do feign, you witnesses above
	Punish my life for tainting of my love!

OLIVIA	Ay me, detested! how am I beguiled!

VIOLA	Who does beguile you? who does do you wrong?

OLIVIA	Hast thou forgot thyself? is it so long?
	Call forth the holy father.

DUKE ORSINO	Come, away!

OLIVIA	Whither, my lord? Cesario, husband, stay.

DUKE ORSINO	Husband!

OLIVIA	       Ay, husband: can he that deny?

DUKE ORSINO	Her husband, sirrah!

VIOLA	No, my lord, not I.

OLIVIA	Alas, it is the baseness of thy fear
	That makes thee strangle thy propriety:
	Fear not, Cesario; take thy fortunes up;
	Be that thou know'st thou art, and then thou art
	As great as that thou fear'st.

	[Enter Priest]

		         O, welcome, father!
	Father, I charge thee, by thy reverence,
	Here to unfold, though lately we intended
	To keep in darkness what occasion now
	Reveals before 'tis ripe, what thou dost know
	Hath newly pass'd between this youth and me.

Priest	A contract of eternal bond of love,
	Confirm'd by mutual joinder of your hands,
	Attested by the holy close of lips,
	Strengthen'd by interchangement of your rings;
	And all the ceremony of this compact
	Seal'd in my function, by my testimony:
	Since when, my watch hath told me, toward my grave
	I have travell'd but two hours.

DUKE ORSINO	O thou dissembling cub! what wilt thou be
	When time hath sow'd a grizzle on thy case?
	Or will not else thy craft so quickly grow,
	That thine own trip shall be thine overthrow?
	Farewell, and take her; but direct thy feet
	Where thou and I henceforth may never meet.

VIOLA	My lord, I do protest--

OLIVIA	O, do not swear!
	Hold little faith, though thou hast too much fear.

	[Enter SIR ANDREW]

SIR ANDREW	For the love of God, a surgeon! Send one presently
	to Sir Toby.

OLIVIA	What's the matter?

SIR ANDREW	He has broke my head across and has given Sir Toby
	a bloody coxcomb too: for the love of God, your
	help! I had rather than forty pound I were at home.

OLIVIA	Who has done this, Sir Andrew?

SIR ANDREW	The count's gentleman, one Cesario: we took him for
	a coward, but he's the very devil incardinate.

DUKE ORSINO	My gentleman, Cesario?

SIR ANDREW	'Od's lifelings, here he is! You broke my head for
	nothing; and that that I did, I was set on to do't
	by Sir Toby.

VIOLA	Why do you speak to me? I never hurt you:
	You drew your sword upon me without cause;
	But I bespoke you fair, and hurt you not.

SIR ANDREW	If a bloody coxcomb be a hurt, you have hurt me: I
	think you set nothing by a bloody coxcomb.

	[Enter SIR TOBY BELCH and Clown]

	Here comes Sir Toby halting; you shall hear more:
	but if he had not been in drink, he would have
	tickled you othergates than he did.

DUKE ORSINO	How now, gentleman! how is't with you?

SIR TOBY BELCH	That's all one: has hurt me, and there's the end
	on't. Sot, didst see Dick surgeon, sot?

Clown	O, he's drunk, Sir Toby, an hour agone; his eyes
	were set at eight i' the morning.

SIR TOBY BELCH	Then he's a rogue, and a passy measures panyn: I
	hate a drunken rogue.

OLIVIA	Away with him! Who hath made this havoc with them?

SIR ANDREW	I'll help you, Sir Toby, because well be dressed together.

SIR TOBY BELCH	Will you help? an ass-head and a coxcomb and a
	knave, a thin-faced knave, a gull!

OLIVIA	Get him to bed, and let his hurt be look'd to.

	[Exeunt Clown, FABIAN, SIR TOBY BELCH, and SIR ANDREW]

	[Enter SEBASTIAN]

SEBASTIAN	I am sorry, madam, I have hurt your kinsman:
	But, had it been the brother of my blood,
	I must have done no less with wit and safety.
	You throw a strange regard upon me, and by that
	I do perceive it hath offended you:
	Pardon me, sweet one, even for the vows
	We made each other but so late ago.

DUKE ORSINO	One face, one voice, one habit, and two persons,
	A natural perspective, that is and is not!

SEBASTIAN	Antonio, O my dear Antonio!
	How have the hours rack'd and tortured me,
	Since I have lost thee!

ANTONIO	Sebastian are you?

SEBASTIAN	                  Fear'st thou that, Antonio?

ANTONIO	How have you made division of yourself?
	An apple, cleft in two, is not more twin
	Than these two creatures. Which is Sebastian?

OLIVIA	Most wonderful!

SEBASTIAN	Do I stand there? I never had a brother;
	Nor can there be that deity in my nature,
	Of here and every where. I had a sister,
	Whom the blind waves and surges have devour'd.
	Of charity, what kin are you to me?
	What countryman? what name? what parentage?

VIOLA	Of Messaline: Sebastian was my father;
	Such a Sebastian was my brother too,
	So went he suited to his watery tomb:
	If spirits can assume both form and suit
	You come to fright us.

SEBASTIAN	A spirit I am indeed;
	But am in that dimension grossly clad
	Which from the womb I did participate.
	Were you a woman, as the rest goes even,
	I should my tears let fall upon your cheek,
	And say 'Thrice-welcome, drowned Viola!'

VIOLA	My father had a mole upon his brow.

SEBASTIAN	And so had mine.

VIOLA	And died that day when Viola from her birth
	Had number'd thirteen years.

SEBASTIAN	O, that record is lively in my soul!
	He finished indeed his mortal act
	That day that made my sister thirteen years.

VIOLA	If nothing lets to make us happy both
	But this my masculine usurp'd attire,
	Do not embrace me till each circumstance
	Of place, time, fortune, do cohere and jump
	That I am Viola: which to confirm,
	I'll bring you to a captain in this town,
	Where lie my maiden weeds; by whose gentle help
	I was preserved to serve this noble count.
	All the occurrence of my fortune since
	Hath been between this lady and this lord.

SEBASTIAN	[To OLIVIA]  So comes it, lady, you have been mistook:
	But nature to her bias drew in that.
	You would have been contracted to a maid;
	Nor are you therein, by my life, deceived,
	You are betroth'd both to a maid and man.

DUKE ORSINO	Be not amazed; right noble is his blood.
	If this be so, as yet the glass seems true,
	I shall have share in this most happy wreck.

	[To VIOLA]

	Boy, thou hast said to me a thousand times
	Thou never shouldst love woman like to me.

VIOLA	And all those sayings will I overswear;
	And those swearings keep as true in soul
	As doth that orbed continent the fire
	That severs day from night.

DUKE ORSINO	Give me thy hand;
	And let me see thee in thy woman's weeds.

VIOLA	The captain that did bring me first on shore
	Hath my maid's garments: he upon some action
	Is now in durance, at Malvolio's suit,
	A gentleman, and follower of my lady's.

OLIVIA	He shall enlarge him: fetch Malvolio hither:
	And yet, alas, now I remember me,
	They say, poor gentleman, he's much distract.

	[Re-enter Clown with a letter, and FABIAN]

	A most extracting frenzy of mine own
	From my remembrance clearly banish'd his.
	How does he, sirrah?

Clown	Truly, madam, he holds Belzebub at the staves's end as
	well as a man in his case may do: has here writ a
	letter to you; I should have given't you to-day
	morning, but as a madman's epistles are no gospels,
	so it skills not much when they are delivered.

OLIVIA	Open't, and read it.

Clown	Look then to be well edified when the fool delivers
	the madman.

	[Reads]

	'By the Lord, madam,'--

OLIVIA	How now! art thou mad?

Clown	No, madam, I do but read madness: an your ladyship
	will have it as it ought to be, you must allow Vox.

OLIVIA	Prithee, read i' thy right wits.

Clown	So I do, madonna; but to read his right wits is to
	read thus: therefore perpend, my princess, and give ear.

OLIVIA	Read it you, sirrah.

	[To FABIAN]

FABIAN	[Reads]  'By the Lord, madam, you wrong me, and the
	world shall know it: though you have put me into
	darkness and given your drunken cousin rule over
	me, yet have I the benefit of my senses as well as
	your ladyship. I have your own letter that induced
	me to the semblance I put on; with the which I doubt
	not but to do myself much right, or you much shame.
	Think of me as you please. I leave my duty a little
	unthought of and speak out of my injury.
		         THE MADLY-USED MALVOLIO.'

OLIVIA	Did he write this?

Clown	Ay, madam.

DUKE ORSINO	This savours not much of distraction.

OLIVIA	See him deliver'd, Fabian; bring him hither.

	[Exit FABIAN]

	My lord so please you, these things further
	thought on,
	To think me as well a sister as a wife,
	One day shall crown the alliance on't, so please you,
	Here at my house and at my proper cost.

DUKE ORSINO	Madam, I am most apt to embrace your offer.

	[To VIOLA]

	Your master quits you; and for your service done him,
	So much against the mettle of your sex,
	So far beneath your soft and tender breeding,
	And since you call'd me master for so long,
	Here is my hand: you shall from this time be
	Your master's mistress.

OLIVIA	A sister! you are she.

	[Re-enter FABIAN, with MALVOLIO]

DUKE ORSINO	Is this the madman?

OLIVIA	Ay, my lord, this same.
	How now, Malvolio!

MALVOLIO	                  Madam, you have done me wrong,
	Notorious wrong.

OLIVIA	                  Have I, Malvolio? no.

MALVOLIO	Lady, you have. Pray you, peruse that letter.
	You must not now deny it is your hand:
	Write from it, if you can, in hand or phrase;
	Or say 'tis not your seal, nor your invention:
	You can say none of this: well, grant it then
	And tell me, in the modesty of honour,
	Why you have given me such clear lights of favour,
	Bade me come smiling and cross-garter'd to you,
	To put on yellow stockings and to frown
	Upon Sir Toby and the lighter people;
	And, acting this in an obedient hope,
	Why have you suffer'd me to be imprison'd,
	Kept in a dark house, visited by the priest,
	And made the most notorious geck and gull
	That e'er invention play'd on? tell me why.

OLIVIA	Alas, Malvolio, this is not my writing,
	Though, I confess, much like the character
	But out of question 'tis Maria's hand.
	And now I do bethink me, it was she
	First told me thou wast mad; then camest in smiling,
	And in such forms which here were presupposed
	Upon thee in the letter. Prithee, be content:
	This practise hath most shrewdly pass'd upon thee;
	But when we know the grounds and authors of it,
	Thou shalt be both the plaintiff and the judge
	Of thine own cause.

FABIAN	Good madam, hear me speak,
	And let no quarrel nor no brawl to come
	Taint the condition of this present hour,
	Which I have wonder'd at. In hope it shall not,
	Most freely I confess, myself and Toby
	Set this device against Malvolio here,
	Upon some stubborn and uncourteous parts
	We had conceived against him: Maria writ
	The letter at Sir Toby's great importance;
	In recompense whereof he hath married her.
	How with a sportful malice it was follow'd,
	May rather pluck on laughter than revenge;
	If that the injuries be justly weigh'd
	That have on both sides pass'd.

OLIVIA	Alas, poor fool, how have they baffled thee!

Clown	Why, 'some are born great, some achieve greatness,
	and some have greatness thrown upon them.' I was
	one, sir, in this interlude; one Sir Topas, sir; but
	that's all one. 'By the Lord, fool, I am not mad.'
	But do you remember? 'Madam, why laugh you at such
	a barren rascal? an you smile not, he's gagged:'
	and thus the whirligig of time brings in his revenges.

MALVOLIO	I'll be revenged on the whole pack of you.

	[Exit]

OLIVIA	He hath been most notoriously abused.

DUKE ORSINO	Pursue him and entreat him to a peace:
	He hath not told us of the captain yet:
	When that is known and golden time convents,
	A solemn combination shall be made
	Of our dear souls. Meantime, sweet sister,
	We will not part from hence. Cesario, come;
	For so you shall be, while you are a man;
	But when in other habits you are seen,
	Orsino's mistress and his fancy's queen.

	[Exeunt all, except Clown]

Clown	[Sings]

	When that I was and a little tiny boy,
	With hey, ho, the wind and the rain,
	A foolish thing was but a toy,
	For the rain it raineth every day.

	But when I came to man's estate,
	With hey, ho, &c.
	'Gainst knaves and thieves men shut their gate,
	For the rain, &c.

	But when I came, alas! to wive,
	With hey, ho, &c.
	By swaggering could I never thrive,
	For the rain, &c.

	But when I came unto my beds,
	With hey, ho, &c.
	With toss-pots still had drunken heads,
	For the rain, &c.

	A great while ago the world begun,
	With hey, ho, &c.
	But that's all one, our play is done,
	And we'll strive to please you every day.

	[Exit]


	KING RICHARD II


	DRAMATIS PERSONAE


KING RICHARD	the Second. (KING RICHARD II:)


JOHN OF GAUNT	Duke of Lancaster		|
			|  uncles to the King.
EDMUND OF LANGLEY	Duke of York  (DUKE OF YORK:)	|


HENRY, surnamed
BOLINGBROKE	(HENRY BOLINGBROKE:)  Duke of Hereford,
	son to John of Gaunt; afterwards King Henry IV.

DUKE OF AUMERLE	son to the Duke of York.

THOMAS MOWBRAY	Duke of Norfolk.

DUKE OF SURREY:

EARL OF SALISBURY:

LORD BERKELEY:


BUSHY	|
	|
BAGOT	|  servants to King Richard.
	|
GREEN	|


EARL
OF NORTHUMBERLAND	(NORTHUMBERLAND:)

HENRY PERCY,
surnamed HOTSPUR	his son. (HENRY PERCY:)

LORD ROSS:

LORD WILLOUGHBY:

LORD FITZWATER:

BISHOP OF CARLISLE:

Abbot Of
Westminster	(Abbot:)

LORD MARSHAL	(Lord Marshal:)

SIR STEPHEN SCROOP:

SIR
PIERCE OF EXTON	(EXTON:)

	Captain of a band of Welshmen. (Captain:)

QUEEN
to King Richard	(QUEEN:)

DUCHESS OF YORK	(DUCHESS OF YORK:)

DUCHESS
OF GLOUCESTER	(DUCHESS:)

	Lady attending on the Queen. (Lady:)

	Lords, Heralds, Officers, Soldiers, two Gardeners,
	Keeper, Messenger, Groom, and other Attendants. (Lord:)
	(First Herald:)
	(Second Herald:)
	(Gardener:)
	(Keeper:)
	(Groom:)
	(Servant:)


SCENE	England and Wales.




	KING RICHARD II


ACT I



SCENE I	London. KING RICHARD II's palace.


	[Enter KING RICHARD II, JOHN OF GAUNT, with other
	Nobles and Attendants]

KING RICHARD II	Old John of Gaunt, time-honour'd Lancaster,
	Hast thou, according to thy oath and band,
	Brought hither Henry Hereford thy bold son,
	Here to make good the boisterous late appeal,
	Which then our leisure would not let us hear,
	Against the Duke of Norfolk, Thomas Mowbray?

JOHN OF GAUNT	I have, my liege.

KING RICHARD II	Tell me, moreover, hast thou sounded him,
	If he appeal the duke on ancient malice;
	Or worthily, as a good subject should,
	On some known ground of treachery in him?

JOHN OF GAUNT	As near as I could sift him on that argument,
	On some apparent danger seen in him
	Aim'd at your highness, no inveterate malice.

KING RICHARD II	Then call them to our presence; face to face,
	And frowning brow to brow, ourselves will hear
	The accuser and the accused freely speak:
	High-stomach'd are they both, and full of ire,
	In rage deaf as the sea, hasty as fire.

	[Enter HENRY BOLINGBROKE and THOMAS MOWBRAY]

HENRY BOLINGBROKE	Many years of happy days befal
	My gracious sovereign, my most loving liege!

THOMAS MOWBRAY	Each day still better other's happiness;
	Until the heavens, envying earth's good hap,
	Add an immortal title to your crown!

KING RICHARD II	We thank you both: yet one but flatters us,
	As well appeareth by the cause you come;
	Namely to appeal each other of high treason.
	Cousin of Hereford, what dost thou object
	Against the Duke of Norfolk, Thomas Mowbray?

HENRY BOLINGBROKE	First, heaven be the record to my speech!
	In the devotion of a subject's love,
	Tendering the precious safety of my prince,
	And free from other misbegotten hate,
	Come I appellant to this princely presence.
	Now, Thomas Mowbray, do I turn to thee,
	And mark my greeting well; for what I speak
	My body shall make good upon this earth,
	Or my divine soul answer it in heaven.
	Thou art a traitor and a miscreant,
	Too good to be so and too bad to live,
	Since the more fair and crystal is the sky,
	The uglier seem the clouds that in it fly.
	Once more, the more to aggravate the note,
	With a foul traitor's name stuff I thy throat;
	And wish, so please my sovereign, ere I move,
	What my tongue speaks my right drawn sword may prove.

THOMAS MOWBRAY	Let not my cold words here accuse my zeal:
	'Tis not the trial of a woman's war,
	The bitter clamour of two eager tongues,
	Can arbitrate this cause betwixt us twain;
	The blood is hot that must be cool'd for this:
	Yet can I not of such tame patience boast
	As to be hush'd and nought at all to say:
	First, the fair reverence of your highness curbs me
	From giving reins and spurs to my free speech;
	Which else would post until it had return'd
	These terms of treason doubled down his throat.
	Setting aside his high blood's royalty,
	And let him be no kinsman to my liege,
	I do defy him, and I spit at him;
	Call him a slanderous coward and a villain:
	Which to maintain I would allow him odds,
	And meet him, were I tied to run afoot
	Even to the frozen ridges of the Alps,
	Or any other ground inhabitable,
	Where ever Englishman durst set his foot.
	Mean time let this defend my loyalty,
	By all my hopes, most falsely doth he lie.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE	Pale trembling coward, there I throw my gage,
	Disclaiming here the kindred of the king,
	And lay aside my high blood's royalty,
	Which fear, not reverence, makes thee to except.
	If guilty dread have left thee so much strength
	As to take up mine honour's pawn, then stoop:
	By that and all the rites of knighthood else,
	Will I make good against thee, arm to arm,
	What I have spoke, or thou canst worse devise.

THOMAS MOWBRAY	I take it up; and by that sword I swear
	Which gently laid my knighthood on my shoulder,
	I'll answer thee in any fair degree,
	Or chivalrous design of knightly trial:
	And when I mount, alive may I not light,
	If I be traitor or unjustly fight!

KING RICHARD II	What doth our cousin lay to Mowbray's charge?
	It must be great that can inherit us
	So much as of a thought of ill in him.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE	Look, what I speak, my life shall prove it true;
	That Mowbray hath received eight thousand nobles
	In name of lendings for your highness' soldiers,
	The which he hath detain'd for lewd employments,
	Like a false traitor and injurious villain.
	Besides I say and will in battle prove,
	Or here or elsewhere to the furthest verge
	That ever was survey'd by English eye,
	That all the treasons for these eighteen years
	Complotted and contrived in this land
	Fetch from false Mowbray their first head and spring.
	Further I say and further will maintain
	Upon his bad life to make all this good,
	That he did plot the Duke of Gloucester's death,
	Suggest his soon-believing adversaries,
	And consequently, like a traitor coward,
	Sluiced out his innocent soul through streams of blood:
	Which blood, like sacrificing Abel's, cries,
	Even from the tongueless caverns of the earth,
	To me for justice and rough chastisement;
	And, by the glorious worth of my descent,
	This arm shall do it, or this life be spent.

KING RICHARD II	How high a pitch his resolution soars!
	Thomas of Norfolk, what say'st thou to this?

THOMAS MOWBRAY	O, let my sovereign turn away his face
	And bid his ears a little while be deaf,
	Till I have told this slander of his blood,
	How God and good men hate so foul a liar.

KING RICHARD II	Mowbray, impartial are our eyes and ears:
	Were he my brother, nay, my kingdom's heir,
	As he is but my father's brother's son,
	Now, by my sceptre's awe, I make a vow,
	Such neighbour nearness to our sacred blood
	Should nothing privilege him, nor partialize
	The unstooping firmness of my upright soul:
	He is our subject, Mowbray; so art thou:
	Free speech and fearless I to thee allow.

THOMAS MOWBRAY	Then, Bolingbroke, as low as to thy heart,
	Through the false passage of thy throat, thou liest.
	Three parts of that receipt I had for Calais
	Disbursed I duly to his highness' soldiers;
	The other part reserved I by consent,
	For that my sovereign liege was in my debt
	Upon remainder of a dear account,
	Since last I went to France to fetch his queen:
	Now swallow down that lie. For Gloucester's death,
	I slew him not; but to my own disgrace
	Neglected my sworn duty in that case.
	For you, my noble Lord of Lancaster,
	The honourable father to my foe
	Once did I lay an ambush for your life,
	A trespass that doth vex my grieved soul
	But ere I last received the sacrament
	I did confess it, and exactly begg'd
	Your grace's pardon, and I hope I had it.
	This is my fault: as for the rest appeall'd,
	It issues from the rancour of a villain,
	A recreant and most degenerate traitor
	Which in myself I boldly will defend;
	And interchangeably hurl down my gage
	Upon this overweening traitor's foot,
	To prove myself a loyal gentleman
	Even in the best blood chamber'd in his bosom.
	In haste whereof, most heartily I pray
	Your highness to assign our trial day.

KING RICHARD II	Wrath-kindled gentlemen, be ruled by me;
	Let's purge this choler without letting blood:
	This we prescribe, though no physician;
	Deep malice makes too deep incision;
	Forget, forgive; conclude and be agreed;
	Our doctors say this is no month to bleed.
	Good uncle, let this end where it begun;
	We'll calm the Duke of Norfolk, you your son.

JOHN OF GAUNT	To be a make-peace shall become my age:
	Throw down, my son, the Duke of Norfolk's gage.

KING RICHARD II	And, Norfolk, throw down his.

JOHN OF GAUNT	When, Harry, when?
	Obedience bids I should not bid again.

KING RICHARD II	Norfolk, throw down, we bid; there is no boot.

THOMAS MOWBRAY	Myself I throw, dread sovereign, at thy foot.
	My life thou shalt command, but not my shame:
	The one my duty owes; but my fair name,
	Despite of death that lives upon my grave,
	To dark dishonour's use thou shalt not have.
	I am disgraced, impeach'd and baffled here,
	Pierced to the soul with slander's venom'd spear,
	The which no balm can cure but his heart-blood
	Which breathed this poison.

KING RICHARD II	Rage must be withstood:
	Give me his gage: lions make leopards tame.

THOMAS MOWBRAY	Yea, but not change his spots: take but my shame.
	And I resign my gage. My dear dear lord,
	The purest treasure mortal times afford
	Is spotless reputation: that away,
	Men are but gilded loam or painted clay.
	A jewel in a ten-times-barr'd-up chest
	Is a bold spirit in a loyal breast.
	Mine honour is my life; both grow in one:
	Take honour from me, and my life is done:
	Then, dear my liege, mine honour let me try;
	In that I live and for that will I die.

KING RICHARD II	Cousin, throw up your gage; do you begin.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE	O, God defend my soul from such deep sin!
	Shall I seem crest-fall'n in my father's sight?
	Or with pale beggar-fear impeach my height
	Before this out-dared dastard? Ere my tongue
	Shall wound my honour with such feeble wrong,
	Or sound so base a parle, my teeth shall tear
	The slavish motive of recanting fear,
	And spit it bleeding in his high disgrace,
	Where shame doth harbour, even in Mowbray's face.

	[Exit JOHN OF GAUNT]

KING RICHARD II	We were not born to sue, but to command;
	Which since we cannot do to make you friends,
	Be ready, as your lives shall answer it,
	At Coventry, upon Saint Lambert's day:
	There shall your swords and lances arbitrate
	The swelling difference of your settled hate:
	Since we can not atone you, we shall see
	Justice design the victor's chivalry.
	Lord marshal, command our officers at arms
	Be ready to direct these home alarms.

	[Exeunt]




	KING RICHARD II


ACT I



SCENE II	The DUKE OF LANCASTER'S palace.


	[Enter JOHN OF GAUNT with DUCHESS]

JOHN OF GAUNT	Alas, the part I had in Woodstock's blood
	Doth more solicit me than your exclaims,
	To stir against the butchers of his life!
	But since correction lieth in those hands
	Which made the fault that we cannot correct,
	Put we our quarrel to the will of heaven;
	Who, when they see the hours ripe on earth,
	Will rain hot vengeance on offenders' heads.

DUCHESS	Finds brotherhood in thee no sharper spur?
	Hath love in thy old blood no living fire?
	Edward's seven sons, whereof thyself art one,
	Were as seven vials of his sacred blood,
	Or seven fair branches springing from one root:
	Some of those seven are dried by nature's course,
	Some of those branches by the Destinies cut;
	But Thomas, my dear lord, my life, my Gloucester,
	One vial full of Edward's sacred blood,
	One flourishing branch of his most royal root,
	Is crack'd, and all the precious liquor spilt,
	Is hack'd down, and his summer leaves all faded,
	By envy's hand and murder's bloody axe.
	Ah, Gaunt, his blood was thine! that bed, that womb,
	That metal, that self-mould, that fashion'd thee
	Made him a man; and though thou livest and breathest,
	Yet art thou slain in him: thou dost consent
	In some large measure to thy father's death,
	In that thou seest thy wretched brother die,
	Who was the model of thy father's life.
	Call it not patience, Gaunt; it is despair:
	In suffering thus thy brother to be slaughter'd,
	Thou showest the naked pathway to thy life,
	Teaching stern murder how to butcher thee:
	That which in mean men we intitle patience
	Is pale cold cowardice in noble breasts.
	What shall I say? to safeguard thine own life,
	The best way is to venge my Gloucester's death.

JOHN OF GAUNT	God's is the quarrel; for God's substitute,
	His deputy anointed in His sight,
	Hath caused his death: the which if wrongfully,
	Let heaven revenge; for I may never lift
	An angry arm against His minister.

DUCHESS	Where then, alas, may I complain myself?

JOHN OF GAUNT	To God, the widow's champion and defence.

DUCHESS	Why, then, I will. Farewell, old Gaunt.
	Thou goest to Coventry, there to behold
	Our cousin Hereford and fell Mowbray fight:
	O, sit my husband's wrongs on Hereford's spear,
	That it may enter butcher Mowbray's breast!
	Or, if misfortune miss the first career,
	Be Mowbray's sins so heavy in his bosom,
	They may break his foaming courser's back,
	And throw the rider headlong in the lists,
	A caitiff recreant to my cousin Hereford!
	Farewell, old Gaunt: thy sometimes brother's wife
	With her companion grief must end her life.

JOHN OF GAUNT	Sister, farewell; I must to Coventry:
	As much good stay with thee as go with me!

DUCHESS	Yet one word more: grief boundeth where it falls,
	Not with the empty hollowness, but weight:
	I take my leave before I have begun,
	For sorrow ends not when it seemeth done.
	Commend me to thy brother, Edmund York.
	Lo, this is all:--nay, yet depart not so;
	Though this be all, do not so quickly go;
	I shall remember more. Bid him--ah, what?--
	With all good speed at Plashy visit me.
	Alack, and what shall good old York there see
	But empty lodgings and unfurnish'd walls,
	Unpeopled offices, untrodden stones?
	And what hear there for welcome but my groans?
	Therefore commend me; let him not come there,
	To seek out sorrow that dwells every where.
	Desolate, desolate, will I hence and die:
	The last leave of thee takes my weeping eye.

	[Exeunt]




	KING RICHARD II


ACT I



SCENE III	The lists at Coventry.


	[Enter the Lord Marshal and the DUKE OF AUMERLE]

Lord Marshal	My Lord Aumerle, is Harry Hereford arm'd?

DUKE OF AUMERLE	Yea, at all points; and longs to enter in.

Lord Marshal	The Duke of Norfolk, sprightfully and bold,
	Stays but the summons of the appellant's trumpet.

DUKE OF AUMERLE	Why, then, the champions are prepared, and stay
	For nothing but his majesty's approach.

	[The trumpets sound, and KING RICHARD enters with
	his nobles, JOHN OF GAUNT, BUSHY, BAGOT, GREEN, and
	others. When they are set, enter THOMAS MOWBRAY in
	arms, defendant, with a Herald]

KING RICHARD II	Marshal, demand of yonder champion
	The cause of his arrival here in arms:
	Ask him his name and orderly proceed
	To swear him in the justice of his cause.

Lord Marshal	In God's name and the king's, say who thou art
	And why thou comest thus knightly clad in arms,
	Against what man thou comest, and what thy quarrel:
	Speak truly, on thy knighthood and thy oath;
	As so defend thee heaven and thy valour!

THOMAS MOWBRAY	My name is Thomas Mowbray, Duke of Norfolk;
	Who hither come engaged by my oath--
	Which God defend a knight should violate!--
	Both to defend my loyalty and truth
	To God, my king and my succeeding issue,
	Against the Duke of Hereford that appeals me
	And, by the grace of God and this mine arm,
	To prove him, in defending of myself,
	A traitor to my God, my king, and me:
	And as I truly fight, defend me heaven!

	[The trumpets sound. Enter HENRY BOLINGBROKE,
	appellant, in armour, with a Herald]

KING RICHARD II	Marshal, ask yonder knight in arms,
	Both who he is and why he cometh hither
	Thus plated in habiliments of war,
	And formally, according to our law,
	Depose him in the justice of his cause.

Lord Marshal	What is thy name? and wherefore comest thou hither,
	Before King Richard in his royal lists?
	Against whom comest thou? and what's thy quarrel?
	Speak like a true knight, so defend thee heaven!

HENRY BOLINGBROKE	Harry of Hereford, Lancaster and Derby
	Am I; who ready here do stand in arms,
	To prove, by God's grace and my body's valour,
	In lists, on Thomas Mowbray, Duke of Norfolk,
	That he is a traitor, foul and dangerous,
	To God of heaven, King Richard and to me;
	And as I truly fight, defend me heaven!

Lord Marshal	On pain of death, no person be so bold
	Or daring-hardy as to touch the lists,
	Except the marshal and such officers
	Appointed to direct these fair designs.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE	Lord marshal, let me kiss my sovereign's hand,
	And bow my knee before his majesty:
	For Mowbray and myself are like two men
	That vow a long and weary pilgrimage;
	Then let us take a ceremonious leave
	And loving farewell of our several friends.

Lord Marshal	The appellant in all duty greets your highness,
	And craves to kiss your hand and take his leave.

KING RICHARD II	We will descend and fold him in our arms.
	Cousin of Hereford, as thy cause is right,
	So be thy fortune in this royal fight!
	Farewell, my blood; which if to-day thou shed,
	Lament we may, but not revenge thee dead.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE	O let no noble eye profane a tear
	For me, if I be gored with Mowbray's spear:
	As confident as is the falcon's flight
	Against a bird, do I with Mowbray fight.
	My loving lord, I take my leave of you;
	Of you, my noble cousin, Lord Aumerle;
	Not sick, although I have to do with death,
	But lusty, young, and cheerly drawing breath.
	Lo, as at English feasts, so I regreet
	The daintiest last, to make the end most sweet:
	O thou, the earthly author of my blood,
	Whose youthful spirit, in me regenerate,
	Doth with a twofold vigour lift me up
	To reach at victory above my head,
	Add proof unto mine armour with thy prayers;
	And with thy blessings steel my lance's point,
	That it may enter Mowbray's waxen coat,
	And furbish new the name of John a Gaunt,
	Even in the lusty havior of his son.

JOHN OF GAUNT	God in thy good cause make thee prosperous!
	Be swift like lightning in the execution;
	And let thy blows, doubly redoubled,
	Fall like amazing thunder on the casque
	Of thy adverse pernicious enemy:
	Rouse up thy youthful blood, be valiant and live.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE	Mine innocency and Saint George to thrive!

THOMAS MOWBRAY	However God or fortune cast my lot,
	There lives or dies, true to King Richard's throne,
	A loyal, just and upright gentleman:
	Never did captive with a freer heart
	Cast off his chains of bondage and embrace
	His golden uncontroll'd enfranchisement,
	More than my dancing soul doth celebrate
	This feast of battle with mine adversary.
	Most mighty liege, and my companion peers,
	Take from my mouth the wish of happy years:
	As gentle and as jocund as to jest
	Go I to fight: truth hath a quiet breast.

KING RICHARD II	Farewell, my lord: securely I espy
	Virtue with valour couched in thine eye.
	Order the trial, marshal, and begin.

Lord Marshal	Harry of Hereford, Lancaster and Derby,
	Receive thy lance; and God defend the right!

HENRY BOLINGBROKE	Strong as a tower in hope, I cry amen.

Lord Marshal	Go bear this lance to Thomas, Duke of Norfolk.

First Herald	Harry of Hereford, Lancaster and Derby,
	Stands here for God, his sovereign and himself,
	On pain to be found false and recreant,
	To prove the Duke of Norfolk, Thomas Mowbray,
	A traitor to his God, his king and him;
	And dares him to set forward to the fight.

Second Herald	Here standeth Thomas Mowbray, Duke of Norfolk,
	On pain to be found false and recreant,
	Both to defend himself and to approve
	Henry of Hereford, Lancaster, and Derby,
	To God, his sovereign and to him disloyal;
	Courageously and with a free desire
	Attending but the signal to begin.

Lord Marshal	Sound, trumpets; and set forward, combatants.

	[A charge sounded]

	Stay, the king hath thrown his warder down.

KING RICHARD II	Let them lay by their helmets and their spears,
	And both return back to their chairs again:
	Withdraw with us: and let the trumpets sound
	While we return these dukes what we decree.

	[A long flourish]

	Draw near,
	And list what with our council we have done.
	For that our kingdom's earth should not be soil'd
	With that dear blood which it hath fostered;
	And for our eyes do hate the dire aspect
	Of civil wounds plough'd up with neighbours' sword;
	And for we think the eagle-winged pride
	Of sky-aspiring and ambitious thoughts,
	With rival-hating envy, set on you
	To wake our peace, which in our country's cradle
	Draws the sweet infant breath of gentle sleep;
	Which so roused up with boisterous untuned drums,
	With harsh resounding trumpets' dreadful bray,
	And grating shock of wrathful iron arms,
	Might from our quiet confines fright fair peace
	And make us wade even in our kindred's blood,
	Therefore, we banish you our territories:
	You, cousin Hereford, upon pain of life,
	Till twice five summers have enrich'd our fields
	Shall not regreet our fair dominions,
	But tread the stranger paths of banishment.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE	Your will be done: this must my comfort be,
	Sun that warms you here shall shine on me;
	And those his golden beams to you here lent
	Shall point on me and gild my banishment.

KING RICHARD II	Norfolk, for thee remains a heavier doom,
	Which I with some unwillingness pronounce:
	The sly slow hours shall not determinate
	The dateless limit of thy dear exile;
	The hopeless word of 'never to return'
	Breathe I against thee, upon pain of life.

THOMAS MOWBRAY	A heavy sentence, my most sovereign liege,
	And all unlook'd for from your highness' mouth:
	A dearer merit, not so deep a maim
	As to be cast forth in the common air,
	Have I deserved at your highness' hands.
	The language I have learn'd these forty years,
	My native English, now I must forego:
	And now my tongue's use is to me no more
	Than an unstringed viol or a harp,
	Or like a cunning instrument cased up,
	Or, being open, put into his hands
	That knows no touch to tune the harmony:
	Within my mouth you have engaol'd my tongue,
	Doubly portcullis'd with my teeth and lips;
	And dull unfeeling barren ignorance
	Is made my gaoler to attend on me.
	I am too old to fawn upon a nurse,
	Too far in years to be a pupil now:
	What is thy sentence then but speechless death,
	Which robs my tongue from breathing native breath?

KING RICHARD II	It boots thee not to be compassionate:
	After our sentence plaining comes too late.

THOMAS MOWBRAY	Then thus I turn me from my country's light,
	To dwell in solemn shades of endless night.

KING RICHARD II	Return again, and take an oath with thee.
	Lay on our royal sword your banish'd hands;
	Swear by the duty that you owe to God--
	Our part therein we banish with yourselves--
	To keep the oath that we administer:
	You never shall, so help you truth and God!
	Embrace each other's love in banishment;
	Nor never look upon each other's face;
	Nor never write, regreet, nor reconcile
	This louring tempest of your home-bred hate;
	Nor never by advised purpose meet
	To plot, contrive, or complot any ill
	'Gainst us, our state, our subjects, or our land.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE	I swear.

THOMAS MOWBRAY	And I, to keep all this.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE	Norfolk, so far as to mine enemy:--
	By this time, had the king permitted us,
	One of our souls had wander'd in the air.
	Banish'd this frail sepulchre of our flesh,
	As now our flesh is banish'd from this land:
	Confess thy treasons ere thou fly the realm;
	Since thou hast far to go, bear not along
	The clogging burthen of a guilty soul.

THOMAS MOWBRAY	No, Bolingbroke: if ever I were traitor,
	My name be blotted from the book of life,
	And I from heaven banish'd as from hence!
	But what thou art, God, thou, and I do know;
	And all too soon, I fear, the king shall rue.
	Farewell, my liege. Now no way can I stray;
	Save back to England, all the world's my way.

	[Exit]

KING RICHARD II	Uncle, even in the glasses of thine eyes
	I see thy grieved heart: thy sad aspect
	Hath from the number of his banish'd years
	Pluck'd four away.

	[To HENRY BOLINGBROKE]

	Six frozen winter spent,
	Return with welcome home from banishment.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE	How long a time lies in one little word!
	Four lagging winters and four wanton springs
	End in a word: such is the breath of kings.

JOHN OF GAUNT	I thank my liege, that in regard of me
	He shortens four years of my son's exile:
	But little vantage shall I reap thereby;
	For, ere the six years that he hath to spend
	Can change their moons and bring their times about
	My oil-dried lamp and time-bewasted light
	Shall be extinct with age and endless night;
	My inch of taper will be burnt and done,
	And blindfold death not let me see my son.

KING RICHARD II	Why uncle, thou hast many years to live.

JOHN OF GAUNT	But not a minute, king, that thou canst give:
	Shorten my days thou canst with sullen sorrow,
	And pluck nights from me, but not lend a morrow;
	Thou canst help time to furrow me with age,
	But stop no wrinkle in his pilgrimage;
	Thy word is current with him for my death,
	But dead, thy kingdom cannot buy my breath.

KING RICHARD II	Thy son is banish'd upon good advice,
	Whereto thy tongue a party-verdict gave:
	Why at our justice seem'st thou then to lour?

JOHN OF GAUNT	Things sweet to taste prove in digestion sour.
	You urged me as a judge; but I had rather
	You would have bid me argue like a father.
	O, had it been a stranger, not my child,
	To smooth his fault I should have been more mild:
	A partial slander sought I to avoid,
	And in the sentence my own life destroy'd.
	Alas, I look'd when some of you should say,
	I was too strict to make mine own away;
	But you gave leave to my unwilling tongue
	Against my will to do myself this wrong.

KING RICHARD II	Cousin, farewell; and, uncle, bid him so:
	Six years we banish him, and he shall go.

	[Flourish. Exeunt KING RICHARD II and train]

DUKE OF AUMERLE	Cousin, farewell: what presence must not know,
	From where you do remain let paper show.

Lord Marshal	My lord, no leave take I; for I will ride,
	As far as land will let me, by your side.

JOHN OF GAUNT	O, to what purpose dost thou hoard thy words,
	That thou return'st no greeting to thy friends?

HENRY BOLINGBROKE	I have too few to take my leave of you,
	When the tongue's office should be prodigal
	To breathe the abundant dolour of the heart.

JOHN OF GAUNT	Thy grief is but thy absence for a time.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE	Joy absent, grief is present for that time.

JOHN OF GAUNT	What is six winters? they are quickly gone.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE	To men in joy; but grief makes one hour ten.

JOHN OF GAUNT	Call it a travel that thou takest for pleasure.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE	My heart will sigh when I miscall it so,
	Which finds it an inforced pilgrimage.

JOHN OF GAUNT	The sullen passage of thy weary steps
	Esteem as foil wherein thou art to set
	The precious jewel of thy home return.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE	Nay, rather, every tedious stride I make
	Will but remember me what a deal of world
	I wander from the jewels that I love.
	Must I not serve a long apprenticehood
	To foreign passages, and in the end,
	Having my freedom, boast of nothing else
	But that I was a journeyman to grief?

JOHN OF GAUNT	All places that the eye of heaven visits
	Are to a wise man ports and happy havens.
	Teach thy necessity to reason thus;
	There is no virtue like necessity.
	Think not the king did banish thee,
	But thou the king. Woe doth the heavier sit,
	Where it perceives it is but faintly borne.
	Go, say I sent thee forth to purchase honour
	And not the king exiled thee; or suppose
	Devouring pestilence hangs in our air
	And thou art flying to a fresher clime:
	Look, what thy soul holds dear, imagine it
	To lie that way thou go'st, not whence thou comest:
	Suppose the singing birds musicians,
	The grass whereon thou tread'st the presence strew'd,
	The flowers fair ladies, and thy steps no more
	Than a delightful measure or a dance;
	For gnarling sorrow hath less power to bite
	The man that mocks at it and sets it light.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE	O, who can hold a fire in his hand
	By thinking on the frosty Caucasus?
	Or cloy the hungry edge of appetite
	By bare imagination of a feast?
	Or wallow naked in December snow
	By thinking on fantastic summer's heat?
	O, no! the apprehension of the good
	Gives but the greater feeling to the worse:
	Fell sorrow's tooth doth never rankle more
	Than when he bites, but lanceth not the sore.

JOHN OF GAUNT	Come, come, my son, I'll bring thee on thy way:
	Had I thy youth and cause, I would not stay.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE	Then, England's ground, farewell; sweet soil, adieu;
	My mother, and my nurse, that bears me yet!
	Where'er I wander, boast of this I can,
	Though banish'd, yet a trueborn Englishman.

	[Exeunt]




	KING RICHARD II


ACT I



SCENE IV	The court.


	[Enter KING RICHARD II, with BAGOT and GREEN at one
	door; and the DUKE OF AUMERLE at another]

KING RICHARD II	We did observe. Cousin Aumerle,
	How far brought you high Hereford on his way?

DUKE OF AUMERLE	I brought high Hereford, if you call him so,
	But to the next highway, and there I left him.

KING RICHARD II	And say, what store of parting tears were shed?

DUKE OF AUMERLE	Faith, none for me; except the north-east wind,
	Which then blew bitterly against our faces,
	Awaked the sleeping rheum, and so by chance
	Did grace our hollow parting with a tear.

KING RICHARD II	What said our cousin when you parted with him?

DUKE OF AUMERLE	'Farewell:'
	And, for my heart disdained that my tongue
	Should so profane the word, that taught me craft
	To counterfeit oppression of such grief
	That words seem'd buried in my sorrow's grave.
	Marry, would the word 'farewell' have lengthen'd hours
	And added years to his short banishment,
	He should have had a volume of farewells;
	But since it would not, he had none of me.

KING RICHARD II	He is our cousin, cousin; but 'tis doubt,
	When time shall call him home from banishment,
	Whether our kinsman come to see his friends.
	Ourself and Bushy, Bagot here and Green
	Observed his courtship to the common people;
	How he did seem to dive into their hearts
	With humble and familiar courtesy,
	What reverence he did throw away on slaves,
	Wooing poor craftsmen with the craft of smiles
	And patient underbearing of his fortune,
	As 'twere to banish their affects with him.
	Off goes his bonnet to an oyster-wench;
	A brace of draymen bid God speed him well
	And had the tribute of his supple knee,
	With 'Thanks, my countrymen, my loving friends;'
	As were our England in reversion his,
	And he our subjects' next degree in hope.

GREEN	Well, he is gone; and with him go these thoughts.
	Now for the rebels which stand out in Ireland,
	Expedient manage must be made, my liege,
	Ere further leisure yield them further means
	For their advantage and your highness' loss.

KING RICHARD II	We will ourself in person to this war:
	And, for our coffers, with too great a court
	And liberal largess, are grown somewhat light,
	We are inforced to farm our royal realm;
	The revenue whereof shall furnish us
	For our affairs in hand: if that come short,
	Our substitutes at home shall have blank charters;
	Whereto, when they shall know what men are rich,
	They shall subscribe them for large sums of gold
	And send them after to supply our wants;
	For we will make for Ireland presently.

	[Enter BUSHY]

	Bushy, what news?

BUSHY	Old John of Gaunt is grievous sick, my lord,
	Suddenly taken; and hath sent post haste
	To entreat your majesty to visit him.

KING RICHARD II	Where lies he?

BUSHY	At Ely House.

KING RICHARD II	Now put it, God, in the physician's mind
	To help him to his grave immediately!
	The lining of his coffers shall make coats
	To deck our soldiers for these Irish wars.
	Come, gentlemen, let's all go visit him:
	Pray God we may make haste, and come too late!

All	Amen.

	[Exeunt]




	KING RICHARD II


ACT II



SCENE I	Ely House.


	[Enter JOHN OF GAUNT sick, with the DUKE OF YORK,
	&c]

JOHN OF GAUNT	Will the king come, that I may breathe my last
	In wholesome counsel to his unstaid youth?

DUKE OF YORK	Vex not yourself, nor strive not with your breath;
	For all in vain comes counsel to his ear.

JOHN OF GAUNT	O, but they say the tongues of dying men
	Enforce attention like deep harmony:
	Where words are scarce, they are seldom spent in vain,
	For they breathe truth that breathe their words in pain.
	He that no more must say is listen'd more
	Than they whom youth and ease have taught to glose;
	More are men's ends mark'd than their lives before:
	The setting sun, and music at the close,
	As the last taste of sweets, is sweetest last,
	Writ in remembrance more than things long past:
	Though Richard my life's counsel would not hear,
	My death's sad tale may yet undeaf his ear.

DUKE OF YORK	No; it is stopp'd with other flattering sounds,
	As praises, of whose taste the wise are fond,
	Lascivious metres, to whose venom sound
	The open ear of youth doth always listen;
	Report of fashions in proud Italy,
	Whose manners still our tardy apish nation
	Limps after in base imitation.
	Where doth the world thrust forth a vanity--
	So it be new, there's no respect how vile--
	That is not quickly buzzed into his ears?
	Then all too late comes counsel to be heard,
	Where will doth mutiny with wit's regard.
	Direct not him whose way himself will choose:
	'Tis breath thou lack'st, and that breath wilt thou lose.

JOHN OF GAUNT	Methinks I am a prophet new inspired
	And thus expiring do foretell of him:
	His rash fierce blaze of riot cannot last,
	For violent fires soon burn out themselves;
	Small showers last long, but sudden storms are short;
	He tires betimes that spurs too fast betimes;
	With eager feeding food doth choke the feeder:
	Light vanity, insatiate cormorant,
	Consuming means, soon preys upon itself.
	This royal throne of kings, this scepter'd isle,
	This earth of majesty, this seat of Mars,
	This other Eden, demi-paradise,
	This fortress built by Nature for herself
	Against infection and the hand of war,
	This happy breed of men, this little world,
	This precious stone set in the silver sea,
	Which serves it in the office of a wall,
	Or as a moat defensive to a house,
	Against the envy of less happier lands,
	This blessed plot, this earth, this realm, this England,
	This nurse, this teeming womb of royal kings,
	Fear'd by their breed and famous by their birth,
	Renowned for their deeds as far from home,
	For Christian service and true chivalry,
	As is the sepulchre in stubborn Jewry,
	Of the world's ransom, blessed Mary's Son,
	This land of such dear souls, this dear dear land,
	Dear for her reputation through the world,
	Is now leased out, I die pronouncing it,
	Like to a tenement or pelting farm:
	England, bound in with the triumphant sea
	Whose rocky shore beats back the envious siege
	Of watery Neptune, is now bound in with shame,
	With inky blots and rotten parchment bonds:
	That England, that was wont to conquer others,
	Hath made a shameful conquest of itself.
	Ah, would the scandal vanish with my life,
	How happy then were my ensuing death!

	[Enter KING RICHARD II and QUEEN, DUKE OF AUMERLE,
	BUSHY, GREEN, BAGOT, LORD ROSS, and LORD
	WILLOUGHBY]

DUKE OF YORK	The king is come: deal mildly with his youth;
	For young hot colts being raged do rage the more.

QUEEN	How fares our noble uncle, Lancaster?

KING RICHARD II	What comfort, man? how is't with aged Gaunt?

JOHN OF GAUNT	O how that name befits my composition!
	Old Gaunt indeed, and gaunt in being old:
	Within me grief hath kept a tedious fast;
	And who abstains from meat that is not gaunt?
	For sleeping England long time have I watch'd;
	Watching breeds leanness, leanness is all gaunt:
	The pleasure that some fathers feed upon,
	Is my strict fast; I mean, my children's looks;
	And therein fasting, hast thou made me gaunt:
	Gaunt am I for the grave, gaunt as a grave,
	Whose hollow womb inherits nought but bones.

KING RICHARD II	Can sick men play so nicely with their names?

JOHN OF GAUNT	No, misery makes sport to mock itself:
	Since thou dost seek to kill my name in me,
	I mock my name, great king, to flatter thee.

KING RICHARD II	Should dying men flatter with those that live?

JOHN OF GAUNT	No, no, men living flatter those that die.

KING RICHARD II	Thou, now a-dying, say'st thou flatterest me.

JOHN OF GAUNT	O, no! thou diest, though I the sicker be.

KING RICHARD II	I am in health, I breathe, and see thee ill.

JOHN OF GAUNT	Now He that made me knows I see thee ill;
	Ill in myself to see, and in thee seeing ill.
	Thy death-bed is no lesser than thy land
	Wherein thou liest in reputation sick;
	And thou, too careless patient as thou art,
	Commit'st thy anointed body to the cure
	Of those physicians that first wounded thee:
	A thousand flatterers sit within thy crown,
	Whose compass is no bigger than thy head;
	And yet, incaged in so small a verge,
	The waste is no whit lesser than thy land.
	O, had thy grandsire with a prophet's eye
	Seen how his son's son should destroy his sons,
	From forth thy reach he would have laid thy shame,
	Deposing thee before thou wert possess'd,
	Which art possess'd now to depose thyself.
	Why, cousin, wert thou regent of the world,
	It were a shame to let this land by lease;
	But for thy world enjoying but this land,
	Is it not more than shame to shame it so?
	Landlord of England art thou now, not king:
	Thy state of law is bondslave to the law; And thou--

KING RICHARD II	         A lunatic lean-witted fool,
	Presuming on an ague's privilege,
	Darest with thy frozen admonition
	Make pale our cheek, chasing the royal blood
	With fury from his native residence.
	Now, by my seat's right royal majesty,
	Wert thou not brother to great Edward's son,
	This tongue that runs so roundly in thy head
	Should run thy head from thy unreverent shoulders.

JOHN OF GAUNT	O, spare me not, my brother Edward's son,
	For that I was his father Edward's son;
	That blood already, like the pelican,
	Hast thou tapp'd out and drunkenly caroused:
	My brother Gloucester, plain well-meaning soul,
	Whom fair befal in heaven 'mongst happy souls!
	May be a precedent and witness good
	That thou respect'st not spilling Edward's blood:
	Join with the present sickness that I have;
	And thy unkindness be like crooked age,
	To crop at once a too long wither'd flower.
	Live in thy shame, but die not shame with thee!
	These words hereafter thy tormentors be!
	Convey me to my bed, then to my grave:
	Love they to live that love and honour have.

	[Exit, borne off by his Attendants]

KING RICHARD II	And let them die that age and sullens have;
	For both hast thou, and both become the grave.

DUKE OF YORK	I do beseech your majesty, impute his words
	To wayward sickliness and age in him:
	He loves you, on my life, and holds you dear
	As Harry Duke of Hereford, were he here.

KING RICHARD II	Right, you say true: as Hereford's love, so his;
	As theirs, so mine; and all be as it is.

	[Enter NORTHUMBERLAND]

NORTHUMBERLAND	My liege, old Gaunt commends him to your majesty.

KING RICHARD II	What says he?

NORTHUMBERLAND	                  Nay, nothing; all is said
	His tongue is now a stringless instrument;
	Words, life and all, old Lancaster hath spent.

DUKE OF YORK	Be York the next that must be bankrupt so!
	Though death be poor, it ends a mortal woe.

KING RICHARD II	The ripest fruit first falls, and so doth he;
	His time is spent, our pilgrimage must be.
	So much for that. Now for our Irish wars:
	We must supplant those rough rug-headed kerns,
	Which live like venom where no venom else
	But only they have privilege to live.
	And for these great affairs do ask some charge,
	Towards our assistance we do seize to us
	The plate, corn, revenues and moveables,
	Whereof our uncle Gaunt did stand possess'd.

DUKE OF YORK	How long shall I be patient? ah, how long
	Shall tender duty make me suffer wrong?
	Not Gloucester's death, nor Hereford's banishment
	Not Gaunt's rebukes, nor England's private wrongs,
	Nor the prevention of poor Bolingbroke
	About his marriage, nor my own disgrace,
	Have ever made me sour my patient cheek,
	Or bend one wrinkle on my sovereign's face.
	I am the last of noble Edward's sons,
	Of whom thy father, Prince of Wales, was first:
	In war was never lion raged more fierce,
	In peace was never gentle lamb more mild,
	Than was that young and princely gentleman.
	His face thou hast, for even so look'd he,
	Accomplish'd with the number of thy hours;
	But when he frown'd, it was against the French
	And not against his friends; his noble hand
	Did will what he did spend and spent not that
	Which his triumphant father's hand had won;
	His hands were guilty of no kindred blood,
	But bloody with the enemies of his kin.
	O Richard! York is too far gone with grief,
	Or else he never would compare between.

KING RICHARD II	Why, uncle, what's the matter?

DUKE OF YORK	O my liege,
	Pardon me, if you please; if not, I, pleased
	Not to be pardon'd, am content withal.
	Seek you to seize and gripe into your hands
	The royalties and rights of banish'd Hereford?
	Is not Gaunt dead, and doth not Hereford live?
	Was not Gaunt just, and is not Harry true?
	Did not the one deserve to have an heir?
	Is not his heir a well-deserving son?
	Take Hereford's rights away, and take from Time
	His charters and his customary rights;
	Let not to-morrow then ensue to-day;
	Be not thyself; for how art thou a king
	But by fair sequence and succession?
	Now, afore God--God forbid I say true!--
	If you do wrongfully seize Hereford's rights,
	Call in the letters patent that he hath
	By his attorneys-general to sue
	His livery, and deny his offer'd homage,
	You pluck a thousand dangers on your head,
	You lose a thousand well-disposed hearts
	And prick my tender patience, to those thoughts
	Which honour and allegiance cannot think.

KING RICHARD II	Think what you will, we seize into our hands
	His plate, his goods, his money and his lands.

DUKE OF YORK	I'll not be by the while: my liege, farewell:
	What will ensue hereof, there's none can tell;
	But by bad courses may be understood
	That their events can never fall out good.

	[Exit]

KING RICHARD II	Go, Bushy, to the Earl of Wiltshire straight:
	Bid him repair to us to Ely House
	To see this business. To-morrow next
	We will for Ireland; and 'tis time, I trow:
	And we create, in absence of ourself,
	Our uncle York lord governor of England;
	For he is just and always loved us well.
	Come on, our queen: to-morrow must we part;
	Be merry, for our time of stay is short

	[Flourish. Exeunt KING RICHARD II, QUEEN, DUKE OF
	AUMERLE, BUSHY, GREEN, and BAGOT]

NORTHUMBERLAND	Well, lords, the Duke of Lancaster is dead.

LORD ROSS	And living too; for now his son is duke.

LORD WILLOUGHBY	Barely in title, not in revenue.

NORTHUMBERLAND	Richly in both, if justice had her right.

LORD ROSS	My heart is great; but it must break with silence,
	Ere't be disburden'd with a liberal tongue.

NORTHUMBERLAND	Nay, speak thy mind; and let him ne'er speak more
	That speaks thy words again to do thee harm!

LORD WILLOUGHBY	Tends that thou wouldst speak to the Duke of Hereford?
	If it be so, out with it boldly, man;
	Quick is mine ear to hear of good towards him.

LORD ROSS	No good at all that I can do for him;
	Unless you call it good to pity him,
	Bereft and gelded of his patrimony.

NORTHUMBERLAND	Now, afore God, 'tis shame such wrongs are borne
	In him, a royal prince, and many moe
	Of noble blood in this declining land.
	The king is not himself, but basely led
	By flatterers; and what they will inform,
	Merely in hate, 'gainst any of us all,
	That will the king severely prosecute
	'Gainst us, our lives, our children, and our heirs.

LORD ROSS	The commons hath he pill'd with grievous taxes,
	And quite lost their hearts: the nobles hath he fined
	For ancient quarrels, and quite lost their hearts.

LORD WILLOUGHBY	And daily new exactions are devised,
	As blanks, benevolences, and I wot not what:
	But what, o' God's name, doth become of this?

NORTHUMBERLAND	Wars have not wasted it, for warr'd he hath not,
	But basely yielded upon compromise
	That which his noble ancestors achieved with blows:
	More hath he spent in peace than they in wars.

LORD ROSS	The Earl of Wiltshire hath the realm in farm.

LORD WILLOUGHBY	The king's grown bankrupt, like a broken man.

NORTHUMBERLAND	Reproach and dissolution hangeth over him.

LORD ROSS	He hath not money for these Irish wars,
	His burthenous taxations notwithstanding,
	But by the robbing of the banish'd duke.

NORTHUMBERLAND	His noble kinsman: most degenerate king!
	But, lords, we hear this fearful tempest sing,
	Yet see no shelter to avoid the storm;
	We see the wind sit sore upon our sails,
	And yet we strike not, but securely perish.

LORD ROSS	We see the very wreck that we must suffer;
	And unavoided is the danger now,
	For suffering so the causes of our wreck.

NORTHUMBERLAND	Not so; even through the hollow eyes of death
	I spy life peering; but I dare not say
	How near the tidings of our comfort is.

LORD WILLOUGHBY	Nay, let us share thy thoughts, as thou dost ours.

LORD ROSS	Be confident to speak, Northumberland:
	We three are but thyself; and, speaking so,
	Thy words are but as thoughts; therefore, be bold.

NORTHUMBERLAND	Then thus: I have from Port le Blanc, a bay
	In Brittany, received intelligence
	That Harry Duke of Hereford, Rainold Lord Cobham,
	[                                               ]
	That late broke from the Duke of Exeter,
	His brother, Archbishop late of Canterbury,
	Sir Thomas Erpingham, Sir John Ramston,
	Sir John Norbery, Sir Robert Waterton and Francis Quoint,
	All these well furnish'd by the Duke of Bretagne
	With eight tall ships, three thousand men of war,
	Are making hither with all due expedience
	And shortly mean to touch our northern shore:
	Perhaps they had ere this, but that they stay
	The first departing of the king for Ireland.
	If then we shall shake off our slavish yoke,
	Imp out our drooping country's broken wing,
	Redeem from broking pawn the blemish'd crown,
	Wipe off the dust that hides our sceptre's gilt
	And make high majesty look like itself,
	Away with me in post to Ravenspurgh;
	But if you faint, as fearing to do so,
	Stay and be secret, and myself will go.

LORD ROSS	To horse, to horse! urge doubts to them that fear.

LORD WILLOUGHBY	Hold out my horse, and I will first be there.

	[Exeunt]




	KING RICHARD II


ACT II



SCENE II	The palace.


	[Enter QUEEN, BUSHY, and BAGOT]

BUSHY	Madam, your majesty is too much sad:
	You promised, when you parted with the king,
	To lay aside life-harming heaviness
	And entertain a cheerful disposition.

QUEEN	To please the king I did; to please myself
	I cannot do it; yet I know no cause
	Why I should welcome such a guest as grief,
	Save bidding farewell to so sweet a guest
	As my sweet Richard: yet again, methinks,
	Some unborn sorrow, ripe in fortune's womb,
	Is coming towards me, and my inward soul
	With nothing trembles: at some thing it grieves,
	More than with parting from my lord the king.

BUSHY	Each substance of a grief hath twenty shadows,
	Which shows like grief itself, but is not so;
	For sorrow's eye, glazed with blinding tears,
	Divides one thing entire to many objects;
	Like perspectives, which rightly gazed upon
	Show nothing but confusion, eyed awry
	Distinguish form: so your sweet majesty,
	Looking awry upon your lord's departure,
	Find shapes of grief, more than himself, to wail;
	Which, look'd on as it is, is nought but shadows
	Of what it is not. Then, thrice-gracious queen,
	More than your lord's departure weep not: more's not seen;
	Or if it be, 'tis with false sorrow's eye,
	Which for things true weeps things imaginary.

QUEEN	It may be so; but yet my inward soul
	Persuades me it is otherwise: howe'er it be,
	I cannot but be sad; so heavy sad
	As, though on thinking on no thought I think,
	Makes me with heavy nothing faint and shrink.

BUSHY	'Tis nothing but conceit, my gracious lady.

QUEEN	'Tis nothing less: conceit is still derived
	From some forefather grief; mine is not so,
	For nothing had begot my something grief;
	Or something hath the nothing that I grieve:
	'Tis in reversion that I do possess;
	But what it is, that is not yet known; what
	I cannot name; 'tis nameless woe, I wot.

	[Enter GREEN]

GREEN	God save your majesty! and well met, gentlemen:
	I hope the king is not yet shipp'd for Ireland.

QUEEN	Why hopest thou so? 'tis better hope he is;
	For his designs crave haste, his haste good hope:
	Then wherefore dost thou hope he is not shipp'd?

GREEN	That he, our hope, might have retired his power,
	And driven into despair an enemy's hope,
	Who strongly hath set footing in this land:
	The banish'd Bolingbroke repeals himself,
	And with uplifted arms is safe arrived
	At Ravenspurgh.

QUEEN	                  Now God in heaven forbid!

GREEN	Ah, madam, 'tis too true: and that is worse,
	The Lord Northumberland, his son young Henry Percy,
	The Lords of Ross, Beaumond, and Willoughby,
	With all their powerful friends, are fled to him.

BUSHY	Why have you not proclaim'd Northumberland
	And all the rest revolted faction traitors?

GREEN	We have: whereupon the Earl of Worcester
	Hath broke his staff, resign'd his stewardship,
	And all the household servants fled with him
	To Bolingbroke.

QUEEN	So, Green, thou art the midwife to my woe,
	And Bolingbroke my sorrow's dismal heir:
	Now hath my soul brought forth her prodigy,
	And I, a gasping new-deliver'd mother,
	Have woe to woe, sorrow to sorrow join'd.

BUSHY	Despair not, madam.

QUEEN	Who shall hinder me?
	I will despair, and be at enmity
	With cozening hope: he is a flatterer,
	A parasite, a keeper back of death,
	Who gently would dissolve the bands of life,
	Which false hope lingers in extremity.

	[Enter DUKE OF YORK]

GREEN	Here comes the Duke of York.

QUEEN	With signs of war about his aged neck:
	O, full of careful business are his looks!
	Uncle, for God's sake, speak comfortable words.

DUKE OF YORK	Should I do so, I should belie my thoughts:
	Comfort's in heaven; and we are on the earth,
	Where nothing lives but crosses, cares and grief.
	Your husband, he is gone to save far off,
	Whilst others come to make him lose at home:
	Here am I left to underprop his land,
	Who, weak with age, cannot support myself:
	Now comes the sick hour that his surfeit made;
	Now shall he try his friends that flatter'd him.

	[Enter a Servant]

Servant	My lord, your son was gone before I came.

DUKE OF YORK	He was? Why, so! go all which way it will!
	The nobles they are fled, the commons they are cold,
	And will, I fear, revolt on Hereford's side.
	Sirrah, get thee to Plashy, to my sister Gloucester;
	Bid her send me presently a thousand pound:
	Hold, take my ring.

Servant	My lord, I had forgot to tell your lordship,
	To-day, as I came by, I called there;
	But I shall grieve you to report the rest.

DUKE OF YORK	What is't, knave?

Servant	An hour before I came, the duchess died.

DUKE OF YORK	God for his mercy! what a tide of woes
	Comes rushing on this woeful land at once!
	I know not what to do: I would to God,
	So my untruth had not provoked him to it,
	The king had cut off my head with my brother's.
	What, are there no posts dispatch'd for Ireland?
	How shall we do for money for these wars?
	Come, sister,--cousin, I would say--pray, pardon me.
	Go, fellow, get thee home, provide some carts
	And bring away the armour that is there.

	[Exit Servant]

	Gentlemen, will you go muster men?
	If I know how or which way to order these affairs
	Thus thrust disorderly into my hands,
	Never believe me. Both are my kinsmen:
	The one is my sovereign, whom both my oath
	And duty bids defend; the other again
	Is my kinsman, whom the king hath wrong'd,
	Whom conscience and my kindred bids to right.
	Well, somewhat we must do. Come, cousin, I'll
	Dispose of you.
	Gentlemen, go, muster up your men,
	And meet me presently at Berkeley.
	I should to Plashy too;
	But time will not permit: all is uneven,
	And every thing is left at six and seven.

	[Exeunt DUKE OF YORK and QUEEN]

BUSHY	The wind sits fair for news to go to Ireland,
	But none returns. For us to levy power
	Proportionable to the enemy
	Is all unpossible.

GREEN	Besides, our nearness to the king in love
	Is near the hate of those love not the king.

BAGOT	And that's the wavering commons: for their love
	Lies in their purses, and whoso empties them
	By so much fills their hearts with deadly hate.

BUSHY	Wherein the king stands generally condemn'd.

BAGOT	If judgement lie in them, then so do we,
	Because we ever have been near the king.

GREEN	Well, I will for refuge straight to Bristol castle:
	The Earl of Wiltshire is already there.

BUSHY	Thither will I with you; for little office
	The hateful commons will perform for us,
	Except like curs to tear us all to pieces.
	Will you go along with us?

BAGOT	No; I will to Ireland to his majesty.
	Farewell: if heart's presages be not vain,
	We three here art that ne'er shall meet again.

BUSHY	That's as York thrives to beat back Bolingbroke.

GREEN	Alas, poor duke! the task he undertakes
	Is numbering sands and drinking oceans dry:
	Where one on his side fights, thousands will fly.
	Farewell at once, for once, for all, and ever.

BUSHY	Well, we may meet again.

BAGOT	I fear me, never.

	[Exeunt]




	KING RICHARD II


ACT II



SCENE III	Wilds in Gloucestershire.


	[Enter HENRY BOLINGBROKE and NORTHUMBERLAND, with Forces]

HENRY BOLINGBROKE	How far is it, my lord, to Berkeley now?

NORTHUMBERLAND	Believe me, noble lord,
	I am a stranger here in Gloucestershire:
	These high wild hills and rough uneven ways
	Draws out our miles, and makes them wearisome,
	And yet your fair discourse hath been as sugar,
	Making the hard way sweet and delectable.
	But I bethink me what a weary way
	From Ravenspurgh to Cotswold will be found
	In Ross and Willoughby, wanting your company,
	Which, I protest, hath very much beguiled
	The tediousness and process of my travel:
	But theirs is sweetened with the hope to have
	The present benefit which I possess;
	And hope to joy is little less in joy
	Than hope enjoy'd: by this the weary lords
	Shall make their way seem short, as mine hath done
	By sight of what I have, your noble company.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE	Of much less value is my company
	Than your good words. But who comes here?

	[Enter HENRY PERCY]

NORTHUMBERLAND	It is my son, young Harry Percy,
	Sent from my brother Worcester, whencesoever.
	Harry, how fares your uncle?

HENRY PERCY	I had thought, my lord, to have learn'd his health of you.

NORTHUMBERLAND	Why, is he not with the queen?

HENRY PERCY	No, my good Lord; he hath forsook the court,
	Broken his staff of office and dispersed
	The household of the king.

NORTHUMBERLAND	What was his reason?
	He was not so resolved when last we spake together.

HENRY PERCY	Because your lordship was proclaimed traitor.
	But he, my lord, is gone to Ravenspurgh,
	To offer service to the Duke of Hereford,
	And sent me over by Berkeley, to discover
	What power the Duke of York had levied there;
	Then with directions to repair to Ravenspurgh.

NORTHUMBERLAND	Have you forgot the Duke of Hereford, boy?

HENRY PERCY	No, my good lord, for that is not forgot
	Which ne'er I did remember: to my knowledge,
	I never in my life did look on him.

NORTHUMBERLAND	Then learn to know him now; this is the duke.

HENRY PERCY	My gracious lord, I tender you my service,
	Such as it is, being tender, raw and young:
	Which elder days shall ripen and confirm
	To more approved service and desert.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE	I thank thee, gentle Percy; and be sure
	I count myself in nothing else so happy
	As in a soul remembering my good friends;
	And, as my fortune ripens with thy love,
	It shall be still thy true love's recompense:
	My heart this covenant makes, my hand thus seals it.

NORTHUMBERLAND	How far is it to Berkeley? and what stir
	Keeps good old York there with his men of war?

HENRY PERCY	There stands the castle, by yon tuft of trees,
	Mann'd with three hundred men, as I have heard;
	And in it are the Lords of York, Berkeley, and Seymour;
	None else of name and noble estimate.

	[Enter LORD ROSS and LORD WILLOUGHBY]

NORTHUMBERLAND	Here come the Lords of Ross and Willoughby,
	Bloody with spurring, fiery-red with haste.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE	Welcome, my lords. I wot your love pursues
	A banish'd traitor: all my treasury
	Is yet but unfelt thanks, which more enrich'd
	Shall be your love and labour's recompense.

LORD ROSS	Your presence makes us rich, most noble lord.

LORD WILLOUGHBY	And far surmounts our labour to attain it.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE	Evermore thanks, the exchequer of the poor;
	Which, till my infant fortune comes to years,
	Stands for my bounty. But who comes here?

	[Enter LORD BERKELEY]

NORTHUMBERLAND	It is my Lord of Berkeley, as I guess.

LORD BERKELEY	My Lord of Hereford, my message is to you.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE	My lord, my answer is--to Lancaster;
	And I am come to seek that name in England;
	And I must find that title in your tongue,
	Before I make reply to aught you say.

LORD BERKELEY	Mistake me not, my lord; 'tis not my meaning
	To raze one title of your honour out:
	To you, my lord, I come, what lord you will,
	From the most gracious regent of this land,
	The Duke of York, to know what pricks you on
	To take advantage of the absent time
	And fright our native peace with self-born arms.

	[Enter DUKE OF YORK attended]

HENRY BOLINGBROKE	I shall not need transport my words by you;
	Here comes his grace in person. My noble uncle!

	[Kneels]

DUKE OF YORK	Show me thy humble heart, and not thy knee,
	Whose duty is deceiveable and false.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE	My gracious uncle--

DUKE OF YORK	Tut, tut!
	Grace me no grace, nor uncle me no uncle:
	I am no traitor's uncle; and that word 'grace.'
	In an ungracious mouth is but profane.
	Why have those banish'd and forbidden legs
	Dared once to touch a dust of England's ground?
	But then more 'why?' why have they dared to march
	So many miles upon her peaceful bosom,
	Frighting her pale-faced villages with war
	And ostentation of despised arms?
	Comest thou because the anointed king is hence?
	Why, foolish boy, the king is left behind,
	And in my loyal bosom lies his power.
	Were I but now the lord of such hot youth
	As when brave Gaunt, thy father, and myself
	Rescued the Black Prince, that young Mars of men,
	From forth the ranks of many thousand French,
	O, then how quickly should this arm of mine.
	Now prisoner to the palsy, chastise thee
	And minister correction to thy fault!

HENRY BOLINGBROKE	My gracious uncle, let me know my fault:
	On what condition stands it and wherein?

DUKE OF YORK	Even in condition of the worst degree,
	In gross rebellion and detested treason:
	Thou art a banish'd man, and here art come
	Before the expiration of thy time,
	In braving arms against thy sovereign.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE	As I was banish'd, I was banish'd Hereford;
	But as I come, I come for Lancaster.
	And, noble uncle, I beseech your grace
	Look on my wrongs with an indifferent eye:
	You are my father, for methinks in you
	I see old Gaunt alive; O, then, my father,
	Will you permit that I shall stand condemn'd
	A wandering vagabond; my rights and royalties
	Pluck'd from my arms perforce and given away
	To upstart unthrifts? Wherefore was I born?
	If that my cousin king be King of England,
	It must be granted I am Duke of Lancaster.
	You have a son, Aumerle, my noble cousin;
	Had you first died, and he been thus trod down,
	He should have found his uncle Gaunt a father,
	To rouse his wrongs and chase them to the bay.
	I am denied to sue my livery here,
	And yet my letters-patents give me leave:
	My father's goods are all distrain'd and sold,
	And these and all are all amiss employ'd.
	What would you have me do? I am a subject,
	And I challenge law: attorneys are denied me;
	And therefore, personally I lay my claim
	To my inheritance of free descent.

NORTHUMBERLAND	The noble duke hath been too much abused.

LORD ROSS	It stands your grace upon to do him right.

LORD WILLOUGHBY	Base men by his endowments are made great.

DUKE OF YORK	My lords of England, let me tell you this:
	I have had feeling of my cousin's wrongs
	And laboured all I could to do him right;
	But in this kind to come, in braving arms,
	Be his own carver and cut out his way,
	To find out right with wrong, it may not be;
	And you that do abet him in this kind
	Cherish rebellion and are rebels all.

NORTHUMBERLAND	The noble duke hath sworn his coming is
	But for his own; and for the right of that
	We all have strongly sworn to give him aid;
	And let him ne'er see joy that breaks that oath!

DUKE OF YORK	Well, well, I see the issue of these arms:
	I cannot mend it, I must needs confess,
	Because my power is weak and all ill left:
	But if I could, by Him that gave me life,
	I would attach you all and make you stoop
	Unto the sovereign mercy of the king;
	But since I cannot, be it known to you
	I do remain as neuter. So, fare you well;
	Unless you please to enter in the castle
	And there repose you for this night.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE	An offer, uncle, that we will accept:
	But we must win your grace to go with us
	To Bristol castle, which they say is held
	By Bushy, Bagot and their complices,
	The caterpillars of the commonwealth,
	Which I have sworn to weed and pluck away.

DUKE OF YORK	It may be I will go with you: but yet I'll pause;
	For I am loath to break our country's laws.
	Nor friends nor foes, to me welcome you are:
	Things past redress are now with me past care.

	[Exeunt]




	KING RICHARD II


ACT II



SCENE IV	A camp in Wales.


	[Enter EARL OF SALISBURY and a Welsh Captain]

Captain	My lord of Salisbury, we have stay'd ten days,
	And hardly kept our countrymen together,
	And yet we hear no tidings from the king;
	Therefore we will disperse ourselves: farewell.

EARL OF SALISBURY	Stay yet another day, thou trusty Welshman:
	The king reposeth all his confidence in thee.

Captain	'Tis thought the king is dead; we will not stay.
	The bay-trees in our country are all wither'd
	And meteors fright the fixed stars of heaven;
	The pale-faced moon looks bloody on the earth
	And lean-look'd prophets whisper fearful change;
	Rich men look sad and ruffians dance and leap,
	The one in fear to lose what they enjoy,
	The other to enjoy by rage and war:
	These signs forerun the death or fall of kings.
	Farewell: our countrymen are gone and fled,
	As well assured Richard their king is dead.

	[Exit]

EARL OF SALISBURY	Ah, Richard, with the eyes of heavy mind
	I see thy glory like a shooting star
	Fall to the base earth from the firmament.
	Thy sun sets weeping in the lowly west,
	Witnessing storms to come, woe and unrest:
	Thy friends are fled to wait upon thy foes,
	And crossly to thy good all fortune goes.

	[Exit]




	KING RICHARD II


ACT III



SCENE I	Bristol. Before the castle.


	[Enter HENRY BOLINGBROKE, DUKE OF YORK,
	NORTHUMBERLAND, LORD ROSS, HENRY PERCY, LORD
	WILLOUGHBY, with BUSHY and GREEN, prisoners]

HENRY BOLINGBROKE	Bring forth these men.
	Bushy and Green, I will not vex your souls--
	Since presently your souls must part your bodies--
	With too much urging your pernicious lives,
	For 'twere no charity; yet, to wash your blood
	From off my hands, here in the view of men
	I will unfold some causes of your deaths.
	You have misled a prince, a royal king,
	A happy gentleman in blood and lineaments,
	By you unhappied and disfigured clean:
	You have in manner with your sinful hours
	Made a divorce betwixt his queen and him,
	Broke the possession of a royal bed
	And stain'd the beauty of a fair queen's cheeks
	With tears drawn from her eyes by your foul wrongs.
	Myself, a prince by fortune of my birth,
	Near to the king in blood, and near in love
	Till you did make him misinterpret me,
	Have stoop'd my neck under your injuries,
	And sigh'd my English breath in foreign clouds,
	Eating the bitter bread of banishment;
	Whilst you have fed upon my signories,
	Dispark'd my parks and fell'd my forest woods,
	From my own windows torn my household coat,
	Razed out my imprese, leaving me no sign,
	Save men's opinions and my living blood,
	To show the world I am a gentleman.
	This and much more, much more than twice all this,
	Condemns you to the death. See them deliver'd over
	To execution and the hand of death.

BUSHY	More welcome is the stroke of death to me
	Than Bolingbroke to England. Lords, farewell.

GREEN	My comfort is that heaven will take our souls
	And plague injustice with the pains of hell.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE	My Lord Northumberland, see them dispatch'd.

	[Exeunt NORTHUMBERLAND and others, with the
	prisoners]

	Uncle, you say the queen is at your house;
	For God's sake, fairly let her be entreated:
	Tell her I send to her my kind commends;
	Take special care my greetings be deliver'd.

DUKE OF YORK	A gentleman of mine I have dispatch'd
	With letters of your love to her at large.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE	Thank, gentle uncle. Come, lords, away.
	To fight with Glendower and his complices:
	Awhile to work, and after holiday.

	[Exeunt]




	KING RICHARD II


ACT III



SCENE II	The coast of Wales. A castle in view.


	[Drums; flourish and colours. Enter KING RICHARD
	II, the BISHOP OF CARLISLE, DUKE OF AUMERLE, and Soldiers]

KING RICHARD II	Barkloughly castle call they this at hand?

DUKE OF AUMERLE	Yea, my lord. How brooks your grace the air,
	After your late tossing on the breaking seas?

KING RICHARD II	Needs must I like it well: I weep for joy
	To stand upon my kingdom once again.
	Dear earth, I do salute thee with my hand,
	Though rebels wound thee with their horses' hoofs:
	As a long-parted mother with her child
	Plays fondly with her tears and smiles in meeting,
	So, weeping, smiling, greet I thee, my earth,
	And do thee favours with my royal hands.
	Feed not thy sovereign's foe, my gentle earth,
	Nor with thy sweets comfort his ravenous sense;
	But let thy spiders, that suck up thy venom,
	And heavy-gaited toads lie in their way,
	Doing annoyance to the treacherous feet
	Which with usurping steps do trample thee:
	Yield stinging nettles to mine enemies;
	And when they from thy bosom pluck a flower,
	Guard it, I pray thee, with a lurking adder
	Whose double tongue may with a mortal touch
	Throw death upon thy sovereign's enemies.
	Mock not my senseless conjuration, lords:
	This earth shall have a feeling and these stones
	Prove armed soldiers, ere her native king
	Shall falter under foul rebellion's arms.

BISHOP OF CARLISLE	Fear not, my lord: that Power that made you king
	Hath power to keep you king in spite of all.
	The means that heaven yields must be embraced,
	And not neglected; else, if heaven would,
	And we will not, heaven's offer we refuse,
	The proffer'd means of succor and redress.

DUKE OF AUMERLE	He means, my lord, that we are too remiss;
	Whilst Bolingbroke, through our security,
	Grows strong and great in substance and in power.

KING RICHARD II	Discomfortable cousin! know'st thou not
	That when the searching eye of heaven is hid,
	Behind the globe, that lights the lower world,
	Then thieves and robbers range abroad unseen
	In murders and in outrage, boldly here;
	But when from under this terrestrial ball
	He fires the proud tops of the eastern pines
	And darts his light through every guilty hole,
	Then murders, treasons and detested sins,
	The cloak of night being pluck'd from off their backs,
	Stand bare and naked, trembling at themselves?
	So when this thief, this traitor, Bolingbroke,
	Who all this while hath revell'd in the night
	Whilst we were wandering with the antipodes,
	Shall see us rising in our throne, the east,
	His treasons will sit blushing in his face,
	Not able to endure the sight of day,
	But self-affrighted tremble at his sin.
	Not all the water in the rough rude sea
	Can wash the balm off from an anointed king;
	The breath of worldly men cannot depose
	The deputy elected by the Lord:
	For every man that Bolingbroke hath press'd
	To lift shrewd steel against our golden crown,
	God for his Richard hath in heavenly pay
	A glorious angel: then, if angels fight,
	Weak men must fall, for heaven still guards the right.

	[Enter EARL OF SALISBURY]

	Welcome, my lord	how far off lies your power?

EARL OF SALISBURY	Nor near nor farther off, my gracious lord,
	Than this weak arm: discomfort guides my tongue
	And bids me speak of nothing but despair.
	One day too late, I fear me, noble lord,
	Hath clouded all thy happy days on earth:
	O, call back yesterday, bid time return,
	And thou shalt have twelve thousand fighting men!
	To-day, to-day, unhappy day, too late,
	O'erthrows thy joys, friends, fortune and thy state:
	For all the Welshmen, hearing thou wert dead.
	Are gone to Bolingbroke, dispersed and fled.

DUKE OF AUMERLE	Comfort, my liege; why looks your grace so pale?

KING RICHARD II	But now the blood of twenty thousand men
	Did triumph in my face, and they are fled;
	And, till so much blood thither come again,
	Have I not reason to look pale and dead?
	All souls that will be safe fly from my side,
	For time hath set a blot upon my pride.

DUKE OF AUMERLE	Comfort, my liege; remember who you are.

KING RICHARD II	I had forgot myself; am I not king?
	Awake, thou coward majesty! thou sleepest.
	Is not the king's name twenty thousand names?
	Arm, arm, my name! a puny subject strikes
	At thy great glory. Look not to the ground,
	Ye favourites of a king: are we not high?
	High be our thoughts: I know my uncle York
	Hath power enough to serve our turn. But who comes here?

	[Enter SIR STEPHEN SCROOP]

SIR STEPHEN SCROOP	More health and happiness betide my liege
	Than can my care-tuned tongue deliver him!

KING RICHARD II	Mine ear is open and my heart prepared;
	The worst is worldly loss thou canst unfold.
	Say, is my kingdom lost? why, 'twas my care
	And what loss is it to be rid of care?
	Strives Bolingbroke to be as great as we?
	Greater he shall not be; if he serve God,
	We'll serve Him too and be his fellow so:
	Revolt our subjects? that we cannot mend;
	They break their faith to God as well as us:
	Cry woe, destruction, ruin and decay:
	The worst is death, and death will have his day.

SIR STEPHEN SCROOP	Glad am I that your highness is so arm'd
	To bear the tidings of calamity.
	Like an unseasonable stormy day,
	Which makes the silver rivers drown their shores,
	As if the world were all dissolved to tears,
	So high above his limits swells the rage
	Of Bolingbroke, covering your fearful land
	With hard bright steel and hearts harder than steel.
	White-beards have arm'd their thin and hairless scalps
	Against thy majesty; boys, with women's voices,
	Strive to speak big and clap their female joints
	In stiff unwieldy arms against thy crown:
	The very beadsmen learn to bend their bows
	Of double-fatal yew against thy state;
	Yea, distaff-women manage rusty bills
	Against thy seat: both young and old rebel,
	And all goes worse than I have power to tell.

KING RICHARD II	Too well, too well thou tell'st a tale so ill.
	Where is the Earl of Wiltshire? where is Bagot?
	What is become of Bushy? where is Green?
	That they have let the dangerous enemy
	Measure our confines with such peaceful steps?
	If we prevail, their heads shall pay for it:
	I warrant they have made peace with Bolingbroke.

SIR STEPHEN SCROOP	Peace have they made with him indeed, my lord.

KING RICHARD II	O villains, vipers, damn'd without redemption!
	Dogs, easily won to fawn on any man!
	Snakes, in my heart-blood warm'd, that sting my heart!
	Three Judases, each one thrice worse than Judas!
	Would they make peace? terrible hell make war
	Upon their spotted souls for this offence!

SIR STEPHEN SCROOP	Sweet love, I see, changing his property,
	Turns to the sourest and most deadly hate:
	Again uncurse their souls; their peace is made
	With heads, and not with hands; those whom you curse
	Have felt the worst of death's destroying wound
	And lie full low, graved in the hollow ground.

DUKE OF AUMERLE	Is Bushy, Green, and the Earl of Wiltshire dead?

SIR STEPHEN SCROOP	Ay, all of them at Bristol lost their heads.

DUKE OF AUMERLE	Where is the duke my father with his power?

KING RICHARD II	No matter where; of comfort no man speak:
	Let's talk of graves, of worms, and epitaphs;
	Make dust our paper and with rainy eyes
	Write sorrow on the bosom of the earth,
	Let's choose executors and talk of wills:
	And yet not so, for what can we bequeath
	Save our deposed bodies to the ground?
	Our lands, our lives and all are Bolingbroke's,
	And nothing can we call our own but death
	And that small model of the barren earth
	Which serves as paste and cover to our bones.
	For God's sake, let us sit upon the ground
	And tell sad stories of the death of kings;
	How some have been deposed; some slain in war,
	Some haunted by the ghosts they have deposed;
	Some poison'd by their wives: some sleeping kill'd;
	All murder'd: for within the hollow crown
	That rounds the mortal temples of a king
	Keeps Death his court and there the antic sits,
	Scoffing his state and grinning at his pomp,
	Allowing him a breath, a little scene,
	To monarchize, be fear'd and kill with looks,
	Infusing him with self and vain conceit,
	As if this flesh which walls about our life,
	Were brass impregnable, and humour'd thus
	Comes at the last and with a little pin
	Bores through his castle wall, and farewell king!
	Cover your heads and mock not flesh and blood
	With solemn reverence: throw away respect,
	Tradition, form and ceremonious duty,
	For you have but mistook me all this while:
	I live with bread like you, feel want,
	Taste grief, need friends: subjected thus,
	How can you say to me, I am a king?

BISHOP OF CARLISLE	My lord, wise men ne'er sit and wail their woes,
	But presently prevent the ways to wail.
	To fear the foe, since fear oppresseth strength,
	Gives in your weakness strength unto your foe,
	And so your follies fight against yourself.
	Fear and be slain; no worse can come to fight:
	And fight and die is death destroying death;
	Where fearing dying pays death servile breath.

DUKE OF AUMERLE	My father hath a power; inquire of him
	And learn to make a body of a limb.

KING RICHARD II	Thou chidest me well: proud Bolingbroke, I come
	To change blows with thee for our day of doom.
	This ague fit of fear is over-blown;
	An easy task it is to win our own.
	Say, Scroop, where lies our uncle with his power?
	Speak sweetly, man, although thy looks be sour.

SIR STEPHEN SCROOP	Men judge by the complexion of the sky
	The state and inclination of the day:
	So may you by my dull and heavy eye,
	My tongue hath but a heavier tale to say.
	I play the torturer, by small and small
	To lengthen out the worst that must be spoken:
	Your uncle York is join'd with Bolingbroke,
	And all your northern castles yielded up,
	And all your southern gentlemen in arms
	Upon his party.

KING RICHARD II	                  Thou hast said enough.
	Beshrew thee, cousin, which didst lead me forth

	[To DUKE OF AUMERLE]

	Of that sweet way I was in to despair!
	What say you now? what comfort have we now?
	By heaven, I'll hate him everlastingly
	That bids me be of comfort any more.
	Go to Flint castle: there I'll pine away;
	A king, woe's slave, shall kingly woe obey.
	That power I have, discharge; and let them go
	To ear the land that hath some hope to grow,
	For I have none: let no man speak again
	To alter this, for counsel is but vain.

DUKE OF AUMERLE	My liege, one word.

KING RICHARD II	He does me double wrong
	That wounds me with the flatteries of his tongue.
	Discharge my followers: let them hence away,
	From Richard's night to Bolingbroke's fair day.

	[Exeunt]




	KING RICHARD II


ACT III



SCENE III	Wales. Before Flint castle.


	[Enter, with drum and colours, HENRY BOLINGBROKE,
	DUKE OF YORK, NORTHUMBERLAND, Attendants, and forces]

HENRY BOLINGBROKE	So that by this intelligence we learn
	The Welshmen are dispersed, and Salisbury
	Is gone to meet the king, who lately landed
	With some few private friends upon this coast.

NORTHUMBERLAND	The news is very fair and good, my lord:
	Richard not far from hence hath hid his head.

DUKE OF YORK	It would beseem the Lord Northumberland
	To say 'King Richard:' alack the heavy day
	When such a sacred king should hide his head.

NORTHUMBERLAND	Your grace mistakes; only to be brief
	Left I his title out.

DUKE OF YORK	The time hath been,
	Would you have been so brief with him, he would
	Have been so brief with you, to shorten you,
	For taking so the head, your whole head's length.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE	Mistake not, uncle, further than you should.

DUKE OF YORK	Take not, good cousin, further than you should.
	Lest you mistake the heavens are o'er our heads.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE	I know it, uncle, and oppose not myself
	Against their will. But who comes here?

	[Enter HENRY PERCY]

	Welcome, Harry: what, will not this castle yield?

HENRY PERCY	The castle royally is mann'd, my lord,
	Against thy entrance.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE	Royally!
	Why, it contains no king?

HENRY PERCY	Yes, my good lord,
	It doth contain a king; King Richard lies
	Within the limits of yon lime and stone:
	And with him are the Lord Aumerle, Lord Salisbury,
	Sir Stephen Scroop, besides a clergyman
	Of holy reverence; who, I cannot learn.

NORTHUMBERLAND	O, belike it is the Bishop of Carlisle.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE	Noble lords,
	Go to the rude ribs of that ancient castle;
	Through brazen trumpet send the breath of parley
	Into his ruin'd ears, and thus deliver:
	Henry Bolingbroke
	On both his knees doth kiss King Richard's hand
	And sends allegiance and true faith of heart
	To his most royal person, hither come
	Even at his feet to lay my arms and power,
	Provided that my banishment repeal'd
	And lands restored again be freely granted:
	If not, I'll use the advantage of my power
	And lay the summer's dust with showers of blood
	Rain'd from the wounds of slaughter'd Englishmen:
	The which, how far off from the mind of Bolingbroke
	It is, such crimson tempest should bedrench
	The fresh green lap of fair King Richard's land,
	My stooping duty tenderly shall show.
	Go, signify as much, while here we march
	Upon the grassy carpet of this plain.
	Let's march without the noise of threatening drum,
	That from this castle's tatter'd battlements
	Our fair appointments may be well perused.
	Methinks King Richard and myself should meet
	With no less terror than the elements
	Of fire and water, when their thundering shock
	At meeting tears the cloudy cheeks of heaven.
	Be he the fire, I'll be the yielding water:
	The rage be his, whilst on the earth I rain
	My waters; on the earth, and not on him.
	March on, and mark King Richard how he looks.

	[Parle without, and answer within. Then a flourish.
	Enter on the walls, KING RICHARD II, the BISHOP OF
	CARLISLE, DUKE OF AUMERLE, SIR STEPHEN SCROOP, and
	EARL OF SALISBURY]

	See, see, King Richard doth himself appear,
	As doth the blushing discontented sun
	From out the fiery portal of the east,
	When he perceives the envious clouds are bent
	To dim his glory and to stain the track
	Of his bright passage to the occident.

DUKE OF YORK	Yet looks he like a king: behold, his eye,
	As bright as is the eagle's, lightens forth
	Controlling majesty: alack, alack, for woe,
	That any harm should stain so fair a show!

KING RICHARD II	We are amazed; and thus long have we stood
	To watch the fearful bending of thy knee,

	[To NORTHUMBERLAND]

	Because we thought ourself thy lawful king:
	And if we be, how dare thy joints forget
	To pay their awful duty to our presence?
	If we be not, show us the hand of God
	That hath dismissed us from our stewardship;
	For well we know, no hand of blood and bone
	Can gripe the sacred handle of our sceptre,
	Unless he do profane, steal, or usurp.
	And though you think that all, as you have done,
	Have torn their souls by turning them from us,
	And we are barren and bereft of friends;
	Yet know, my master, God omnipotent,
	Is mustering in his clouds on our behalf
	Armies of pestilence; and they shall strike
	Your children yet unborn and unbegot,
	That lift your vassal hands against my head
	And threat the glory of my precious crown.
	Tell Bolingbroke--for yond methinks he stands--
	That every stride he makes upon my land
	Is dangerous treason: he is come to open
	The purple testament of bleeding war;
	But ere the crown he looks for live in peace,
	Ten thousand bloody crowns of mothers' sons
	Shall ill become the flower of England's face,
	Change the complexion of her maid-pale peace
	To scarlet indignation and bedew
	Her pastures' grass with faithful English blood.

NORTHUMBERLAND	The king of heaven forbid our lord the king
	Should so with civil and uncivil arms
	Be rush'd upon! Thy thrice noble cousin
	Harry Bolingbroke doth humbly kiss thy hand;
	And by the honourable tomb he swears,
	That stands upon your royal grandsire's bones,
	And by the royalties of both your bloods,
	Currents that spring from one most gracious head,
	And by the buried hand of warlike Gaunt,
	And by the worth and honour of himself,
	Comprising all that may be sworn or said,
	His coming hither hath no further scope
	Than for his lineal royalties and to beg
	Enfranchisement immediate on his knees:
	Which on thy royal party granted once,
	His glittering arms he will commend to rust,
	His barbed steeds to stables, and his heart
	To faithful service of your majesty.
	This swears he, as he is a prince, is just;
	And, as I am a gentleman, I credit him.

KING RICHARD II	Northumberland, say thus the king returns:
	His noble cousin is right welcome hither;
	And all the number of his fair demands
	Shall be accomplish'd without contradiction:
	With all the gracious utterance thou hast
	Speak to his gentle hearing kind commends.
	We do debase ourselves, cousin, do we not,

	[To DUKE OF AUMERLE]

	To look so poorly and to speak so fair?
	Shall we call back Northumberland, and send
	Defiance to the traitor, and so die?

DUKE OF AUMERLE	No, good my lord; let's fight with gentle words
	Till time lend friends and friends their helpful swords.

KING RICHARD II	O God, O God! that e'er this tongue of mine,
	That laid the sentence of dread banishment
	On yon proud man, should take it off again
	With words of sooth! O that I were as great
	As is my grief, or lesser than my name!
	Or that I could forget what I have been,
	Or not remember what I must be now!
	Swell'st thou, proud heart? I'll give thee scope to beat,
	Since foes have scope to beat both thee and me.

DUKE OF AUMERLE	Northumberland comes back from Bolingbroke.

KING RICHARD II	What must the king do now? must he submit?
	The king shall do it: must he be deposed?
	The king shall be contented: must he lose
	The name of king? o' God's name, let it go:
	I'll give my jewels for a set of beads,
	My gorgeous palace for a hermitage,
	My gay apparel for an almsman's gown,
	My figured goblets for a dish of wood,
	My sceptre for a palmer's walking staff,
	My subjects for a pair of carved saints
	And my large kingdom for a little grave,
	A little little grave, an obscure grave;
	Or I'll be buried in the king's highway,
	Some way of common trade, where subjects' feet
	May hourly trample on their sovereign's head;
	For on my heart they tread now whilst I live;
	And buried once, why not upon my head?
	Aumerle, thou weep'st, my tender-hearted cousin!
	We'll make foul weather with despised tears;
	Our sighs and they shall lodge the summer corn,
	And make a dearth in this revolting land.
	Or shall we play the wantons with our woes,
	And make some pretty match with shedding tears?
	As thus, to drop them still upon one place,
	Till they have fretted us a pair of graves
	Within the earth; and, therein laid,--there lies
	Two kinsmen digg'd their graves with weeping eyes.
	Would not this ill do well? Well, well, I see
	I talk but idly, and you laugh at me.
	Most mighty prince, my Lord Northumberland,
	What says King Bolingbroke? will his majesty
	Give Richard leave to live till Richard die?
	You make a leg, and Bolingbroke says ay.

NORTHUMBERLAND	My lord, in the base court he doth attend
	To speak with you; may it please you to come down.

KING RICHARD II	Down, down I come; like glistering Phaethon,
	Wanting the manage of unruly jades.
	In the base court? Base court, where kings grow base,
	To come at traitors' calls and do them grace.
	In the base court? Come down? Down, court!
	down, king!
	For night-owls shriek where mounting larks
	should sing.

	[Exeunt from above]

HENRY BOLINGBROKE	What says his majesty?

NORTHUMBERLAND	Sorrow and grief of heart
	Makes him speak fondly, like a frantic man
	Yet he is come.

	[Enter KING RICHARD and his attendants below]

HENRY BOLINGBROKE	Stand all apart,
	And show fair duty to his majesty.

	[He kneels down]

	My gracious lord,--

KING RICHARD II	Fair cousin, you debase your princely knee
	To make the base earth proud with kissing it:
	Me rather had my heart might feel your love
	Than my unpleased eye see your courtesy.
	Up, cousin, up; your heart is up, I know,
	Thus high at least, although your knee be low.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE	My gracious lord, I come but for mine own.

KING RICHARD II	Your own is yours, and I am yours, and all.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE	So far be mine, my most redoubted lord,
	As my true service shall deserve your love.

KING RICHARD II	Well you deserve: they well deserve to have,
	That know the strong'st and surest way to get.
	Uncle, give me your hands: nay, dry your eyes;
	Tears show their love, but want their remedies.
	Cousin, I am too young to be your father,
	Though you are old enough to be my heir.
	What you will have, I'll give, and willing too;
	For do we must what force will have us do.
	Set on towards London, cousin, is it so?

HENRY BOLINGBROKE	Yea, my good lord.

KING RICHARD II	Then I must not say no.

	[Flourish. Exeunt]




	KING RICHARD II


ACT III



SCENE IV	LANGLEY. The DUKE OF YORK's garden.


	[Enter the QUEEN and two Ladies]

QUEEN	What sport shall we devise here in this garden,
	To drive away the heavy thought of care?

Lady	Madam, we'll play at bowls.

QUEEN	'Twill make me think the world is full of rubs,
	And that my fortune rubs against the bias.

Lady	Madam, we'll dance.

QUEEN	My legs can keep no measure in delight,
	When my poor heart no measure keeps in grief:
	Therefore, no dancing, girl; some other sport.

Lady	Madam, we'll tell tales.

QUEEN	Of sorrow or of joy?

Lady	Of either, madam.

QUEEN	Of neither, girl:
	For of joy, being altogether wanting,
	It doth remember me the more of sorrow;
	Or if of grief, being altogether had,
	It adds more sorrow to my want of joy:
	For what I have I need not to repeat;
	And what I want it boots not to complain.

Lady	Madam, I'll sing.

QUEEN	'Tis well that thou hast cause
	But thou shouldst please me better, wouldst thou weep.

Lady	I could weep, madam, would it do you good.

QUEEN	And I could sing, would weeping do me good,
	And never borrow any tear of thee.

	[Enter a Gardener, and two Servants]

	But stay, here come the gardeners:
	Let's step into the shadow of these trees.
	My wretchedness unto a row of pins,
	They'll talk of state; for every one doth so
	Against a change; woe is forerun with woe.

	[QUEEN and Ladies retire]

Gardener	Go, bind thou up yon dangling apricocks,
	Which, like unruly children, make their sire
	Stoop with oppression of their prodigal weight:
	Give some supportance to the bending twigs.
	Go thou, and like an executioner,
	Cut off the heads of too fast growing sprays,
	That look too lofty in our commonwealth:
	All must be even in our government.
	You thus employ'd, I will go root away
	The noisome weeds, which without profit suck
	The soil's fertility from wholesome flowers.

Servant	Why should we in the compass of a pale
	Keep law and form and due proportion,
	Showing, as in a model, our firm estate,
	When our sea-walled garden, the whole land,
	Is full of weeds, her fairest flowers choked up,
	Her fruit-trees all upturned, her hedges ruin'd,
	Her knots disorder'd and her wholesome herbs
	Swarming with caterpillars?

Gardener	Hold thy peace:
	He that hath suffer'd this disorder'd spring
	Hath now himself met with the fall of leaf:
	The weeds which his broad-spreading leaves did shelter,
	That seem'd in eating him to hold him up,
	Are pluck'd up root and all by Bolingbroke,
	I mean the Earl of Wiltshire, Bushy, Green.

Servant	What, are they dead?

Gardener	They are; and Bolingbroke
	Hath seized the wasteful king. O, what pity is it
	That he had not so trimm'd and dress'd his land
	As we this garden! We at time of year
	Do wound the bark, the skin of our fruit-trees,
	Lest, being over-proud in sap and blood,
	With too much riches it confound itself:
	Had he done so to great and growing men,
	They might have lived to bear and he to taste
	Their fruits of duty: superfluous branches
	We lop away, that bearing boughs may live:
	Had he done so, himself had borne the crown,
	Which waste of idle hours hath quite thrown down.

Servant	What, think you then the king shall be deposed?

Gardener	Depress'd he is already, and deposed
	'Tis doubt he will be: letters came last night
	To a dear friend of the good Duke of York's,
	That tell black tidings.

QUEEN	O, I am press'd to death through want of speaking!

	[Coming forward]

	Thou, old Adam's likeness, set to dress this garden,
	How dares thy harsh rude tongue sound this unpleasing news?
	What Eve, what serpent, hath suggested thee
	To make a second fall of cursed man?
	Why dost thou say King Richard is deposed?
	Darest thou, thou little better thing than earth,
	Divine his downfall? Say, where, when, and how,
	Camest thou by this ill tidings? speak, thou wretch.

Gardener	Pardon me, madam: little joy have I
	To breathe this news; yet what I say is true.
	King Richard, he is in the mighty hold
	Of Bolingbroke: their fortunes both are weigh'd:
	In your lord's scale is nothing but himself,
	And some few vanities that make him light;
	But in the balance of great Bolingbroke,
	Besides himself, are all the English peers,
	And with that odds he weighs King Richard down.
	Post you to London, and you will find it so;
	I speak no more than every one doth know.

QUEEN	Nimble mischance, that art so light of foot,
	Doth not thy embassage belong to me,
	And am I last that knows it? O, thou think'st
	To serve me last, that I may longest keep
	Thy sorrow in my breast. Come, ladies, go,
	To meet at London London's king in woe.
	What, was I born to this, that my sad look
	Should grace the triumph of great Bolingbroke?
	Gardener, for telling me these news of woe,
	Pray God the plants thou graft'st may never grow.

	[Exeunt QUEEN and Ladies]

GARDENER	Poor queen! so that thy state might be no worse,
	I would my skill were subject to thy curse.
	Here did she fall a tear; here in this place
	I'll set a bank of rue, sour herb of grace:
	Rue, even for ruth, here shortly shall be seen,
	In the remembrance of a weeping queen.

	[Exeunt]




	KING RICHARD II


ACT IV



SCENE I	Westminster Hall.


	[Enter, as to the Parliament, HENRY BOLINGBROKE,
	DUKE OF AUMERLE, NORTHUMBERLAND, HENRY PERCY, LORD
	FITZWATER, DUKE OF SURREY, the BISHOP OF CARLISLE,
	the Abbot Of Westminster, and another Lord, Herald,
	Officers, and BAGOT]

HENRY BOLINGBROKE	Call forth Bagot.
	Now, Bagot, freely speak thy mind;
	What thou dost know of noble Gloucester's death,
	Who wrought it with the king, and who perform'd
	The bloody office of his timeless end.

BAGOT	Then set before my face the Lord Aumerle.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE	Cousin, stand forth, and look upon that man.

BAGOT	My Lord Aumerle, I know your daring tongue
	Scorns to unsay what once it hath deliver'd.
	In that dead time when Gloucester's death was plotted,
	I heard you say, 'Is not my arm of length,
	That reacheth from the restful English court
	As far as Calais, to mine uncle's head?'
	Amongst much other talk, that very time,
	I heard you say that you had rather refuse
	The offer of an hundred thousand crowns
	Than Bolingbroke's return to England;
	Adding withal how blest this land would be
	In this your cousin's death.

DUKE OF AUMERLE	Princes and noble lords,
	What answer shall I make to this base man?
	Shall I so much dishonour my fair stars,
	On equal terms to give him chastisement?
	Either I must, or have mine honour soil'd
	With the attainder of his slanderous lips.
	There is my gage, the manual seal of death,
	That marks thee out for hell: I say, thou liest,
	And will maintain what thou hast said is false
	In thy heart-blood, though being all too base
	To stain the temper of my knightly sword.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE	Bagot, forbear; thou shalt not take it up.

DUKE OF AUMERLE	Excepting one, I would he were the best
	In all this presence that hath moved me so.

LORD FITZWATER	If that thy valour stand on sympathy,
	There is my gage, Aumerle, in gage to thine:
	By that fair sun which shows me where thou stand'st,
	I heard thee say, and vauntingly thou spakest it
	That thou wert cause of noble Gloucester's death.
	If thou deny'st it twenty times, thou liest;
	And I will turn thy falsehood to thy heart,
	Where it was forged, with my rapier's point.

DUKE OF AUMERLE	Thou darest not, coward, live to see that day.

LORD FITZWATER	Now by my soul, I would it were this hour.

DUKE OF AUMERLE	Fitzwater, thou art damn'd to hell for this.

HENRY PERCY	Aumerle, thou liest; his honour is as true
	In this appeal as thou art all unjust;
	And that thou art so, there I throw my gage,
	To prove it on thee to the extremest point
	Of mortal breathing: seize it, if thou darest.

DUKE OF AUMERLE	An if I do not, may my hands rot off
	And never brandish more revengeful steel
	Over the glittering helmet of my foe!

Lord	I task the earth to the like, forsworn Aumerle;
	And spur thee on with full as many lies
	As may be holloa'd in thy treacherous ear
	From sun to sun: there is my honour's pawn;
	Engage it to the trial, if thou darest.

DUKE OF AUMERLE	Who sets me else? by heaven, I'll throw at all:
	I have a thousand spirits in one breast,
	To answer twenty thousand such as you.

DUKE OF SURREY	My Lord Fitzwater, I do remember well
	The very time Aumerle and you did talk.

LORD FITZWATER	'Tis very true: you were in presence then;
	And you can witness with me this is true.

DUKE OF SURREY	As false, by heaven, as heaven itself is true.

LORD FITZWATER	Surrey, thou liest.

DUKE OF SURREY	Dishonourable boy!
	That lie shall lie so heavy on my sword,
	That it shall render vengeance and revenge
	Till thou the lie-giver and that lie do lie
	In earth as quiet as thy father's skull:
	In proof whereof, there is my honour's pawn;
	Engage it to the trial, if thou darest.

LORD FITZWATER	How fondly dost thou spur a forward horse!
	If I dare eat, or drink, or breathe, or live,
	I dare meet Surrey in a wilderness,
	And spit upon him, whilst I say he lies,
	And lies, and lies: there is my bond of faith,
	To tie thee to my strong correction.
	As I intend to thrive in this new world,
	Aumerle is guilty of my true appeal:
	Besides, I heard the banish'd Norfolk say
	That thou, Aumerle, didst send two of thy men
	To execute the noble duke at Calais.

DUKE OF AUMERLE	Some honest Christian trust me with a gage
	That Norfolk lies: here do I throw down this,
	If he may be repeal'd, to try his honour.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE	These differences shall all rest under gage
	Till Norfolk be repeal'd: repeal'd he shall be,
	And, though mine enemy, restored again
	To all his lands and signories: when he's return'd,
	Against Aumerle we will enforce his trial.

BISHOP OF CARLISLE	That honourable day shall ne'er be seen.
	Many a time hath banish'd Norfolk fought
	For Jesu Christ in glorious Christian field,
	Streaming the ensign of the Christian cross
	Against black pagans, Turks, and Saracens:
	And toil'd with works of war, retired himself
	To Italy; and there at Venice gave
	His body to that pleasant country's earth,
	And his pure soul unto his captain Christ,
	Under whose colours he had fought so long.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE	Why, bishop, is Norfolk dead?

BISHOP OF CARLISLE	As surely as I live, my lord.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE	Sweet peace conduct his sweet soul to the bosom
	Of good old Abraham! Lords appellants,
	Your differences shall all rest under gage
	Till we assign you to your days of trial.

	[Enter DUKE OF YORK, attended]

DUKE OF YORK	Great Duke of Lancaster, I come to thee
	From plume-pluck'd Richard; who with willing soul
	Adopts thee heir, and his high sceptre yields
	To the possession of thy royal hand:
	Ascend his throne, descending now from him;
	And long live Henry, fourth of that name!

HENRY BOLINGBROKE	In God's name, I'll ascend the regal throne.

BISHOP OF CARLISLE	Marry. God forbid!
	Worst in this royal presence may I speak,
	Yet best beseeming me to speak the truth.
	Would God that any in this noble presence
	Were enough noble to be upright judge
	Of noble Richard! then true noblesse would
	Learn him forbearance from so foul a wrong.
	What subject can give sentence on his king?
	And who sits here that is not Richard's subject?
	Thieves are not judged but they are by to hear,
	Although apparent guilt be seen in them;
	And shall the figure of God's majesty,
	His captain, steward, deputy-elect,
	Anointed, crowned, planted many years,
	Be judged by subject and inferior breath,
	And he himself not present? O, forfend it, God,
	That in a Christian climate souls refined
	Should show so heinous, black, obscene a deed!
	I speak to subjects, and a subject speaks,
	Stirr'd up by God, thus boldly for his king:
	My Lord of Hereford here, whom you call king,
	Is a foul traitor to proud Hereford's king:
	And if you crown him, let me prophesy:
	The blood of English shall manure the ground,
	And future ages groan for this foul act;
	Peace shall go sleep with Turks and infidels,
	And in this seat of peace tumultuous wars
	Shall kin with kin and kind with kind confound;
	Disorder, horror, fear and mutiny
	Shall here inhabit, and this land be call'd
	The field of Golgotha and dead men's skulls.
	O, if you raise this house against this house,
	It will the woefullest division prove
	That ever fell upon this cursed earth.
	Prevent it, resist it, let it not be so,
	Lest child, child's children, cry against you woe!

NORTHUMBERLAND	Well have you argued, sir; and, for your pains,
	Of capital treason we arrest you here.
	My Lord of Westminster, be it your charge
	To keep him safely till his day of trial.
	May it please you, lords, to grant the commons' suit.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE	Fetch hither Richard, that in common view
	He may surrender; so we shall proceed
	Without suspicion.

DUKE OF YORK	                  I will be his conduct.

	[Exit]

HENRY BOLINGBROKE	Lords, you that here are under our arrest,
	Procure your sureties for your days of answer.
	Little are we beholding to your love,
	And little look'd for at your helping hands.

	[Re-enter DUKE OF YORK, with KING RICHARD II, and
	Officers bearing the regalia]

KING RICHARD II	Alack, why am I sent for to a king,
	Before I have shook off the regal thoughts
	Wherewith I reign'd? I hardly yet have learn'd
	To insinuate, flatter, bow, and bend my limbs:
	Give sorrow leave awhile to tutor me
	To this submission. Yet I well remember
	The favours of these men: were they not mine?
	Did they not sometime cry, 'all hail!' to me?
	So Judas did to Christ: but he, in twelve,
	Found truth in all but one: I, in twelve thousand, none.
	God save the king! Will no man say amen?
	Am I both priest and clerk? well then, amen.
	God save the king! although I be not he;
	And yet, amen, if heaven do think him me.
	To do what service am I sent for hither?

DUKE OF YORK	To do that office of thine own good will
	Which tired majesty did make thee offer,
	The resignation of thy state and crown
	To Henry Bolingbroke.

KING RICHARD II	Give me the crown. Here, cousin, seize the crown;
	Here cousin:
	On this side my hand, and on that side yours.
	Now is this golden crown like a deep well
	That owes two buckets, filling one another,
	The emptier ever dancing in the air,
	The other down, unseen and full of water:
	That bucket down and full of tears am I,
	Drinking my griefs, whilst you mount up on high.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE	I thought you had been willing to resign.

KING RICHARD II	My crown I am; but still my griefs are mine:
	You may my glories and my state depose,
	But not my griefs; still am I king of those.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE	Part of your cares you give me with your crown.

KING RICHARD II	Your cares set up do not pluck my cares down.
	My care is loss of care, by old care done;
	Your care is gain of care, by new care won:
	The cares I give I have, though given away;
	They tend the crown, yet still with me they stay.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE	Are you contented to resign the crown?

KING RICHARD II	Ay, no; no, ay; for I must nothing be;
	Therefore no no, for I resign to thee.
	Now mark me, how I will undo myself;
	I give this heavy weight from off my head
	And this unwieldy sceptre from my hand,
	The pride of kingly sway from out my heart;
	With mine own tears I wash away my balm,
	With mine own hands I give away my crown,
	With mine own tongue deny my sacred state,
	With mine own breath release all duty's rites:
	All pomp and majesty I do forswear;
	My manors, rents, revenues I forego;
	My acts, decrees, and statutes I deny:
	God pardon all oaths that are broke to me!
	God keep all vows unbroke that swear to thee!
	Make me, that nothing have, with nothing grieved,
	And thou with all pleased, that hast all achieved!
	Long mayst thou live in Richard's seat to sit,
	And soon lie Richard in an earthly pit!
	God save King Harry, unking'd Richard says,
	And send him many years of sunshine days!
	What more remains?

NORTHUMBERLAND	                  No more, but that you read
	These accusations and these grievous crimes
	Committed by your person and your followers
	Against the state and profit of this land;
	That, by confessing them, the souls of men
	May deem that you are worthily deposed.

KING RICHARD II	Must I do so? and must I ravel out
	My weaved-up folly? Gentle Northumberland,
	If thy offences were upon record,
	Would it not shame thee in so fair a troop
	To read a lecture of them? If thou wouldst,
	There shouldst thou find one heinous article,
	Containing the deposing of a king
	And cracking the strong warrant of an oath,
	Mark'd with a blot, damn'd in the book of heaven:
	Nay, all of you that stand and look upon,
	Whilst that my wretchedness doth bait myself,
	Though some of you with Pilate wash your hands
	Showing an outward pity; yet you Pilates
	Have here deliver'd me to my sour cross,
	And water cannot wash away your sin.

NORTHUMBERLAND	My lord, dispatch; read o'er these articles.

KING RICHARD II	Mine eyes are full of tears, I cannot see:
	And yet salt water blinds them not so much
	But they can see a sort of traitors here.
	Nay, if I turn mine eyes upon myself,
	I find myself a traitor with the rest;
	For I have given here my soul's consent
	To undeck the pompous body of a king;
	Made glory base and sovereignty a slave,
	Proud majesty a subject, state a peasant.

NORTHUMBERLAND	My lord,--

KING RICHARD II	No lord of thine, thou haught insulting man,
	Nor no man's lord; I have no name, no title,
	No, not that name was given me at the font,
	But 'tis usurp'd: alack the heavy day,
	That I have worn so many winters out,
	And know not now what name to call myself!
	O that I were a mockery king of snow,
	Standing before the sun of Bolingbroke,
	To melt myself away in water-drops!
	Good king, great king, and yet not greatly good,
	An if my word be sterling yet in England,
	Let it command a mirror hither straight,
	That it may show me what a face I have,
	Since it is bankrupt of his majesty.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE	Go some of you and fetch a looking-glass.

	[Exit an attendant]

NORTHUMBERLAND	Read o'er this paper while the glass doth come.

KING RICHARD II	Fiend, thou torment'st me ere I come to hell!

HENRY BOLINGBROKE	Urge it no more, my Lord Northumberland.

NORTHUMBERLAND	The commons will not then be satisfied.

KING RICHARD II	They shall be satisfied: I'll read enough,
	When I do see the very book indeed
	Where all my sins are writ, and that's myself.

	[Re-enter Attendant, with a glass]

	Give me the glass, and therein will I read.
	No deeper wrinkles yet? hath sorrow struck
	So many blows upon this face of mine,
	And made no deeper wounds? O flattering glass,
	Like to my followers in prosperity,
	Thou dost beguile me! Was this face the face
	That every day under his household roof
	Did keep ten thousand men? was this the face
	That, like the sun, did make beholders wink?
	Was this the face that faced so many follies,
	And was at last out-faced by Bolingbroke?
	A brittle glory shineth in this face:
	As brittle as the glory is the face;

	[Dashes the glass against the ground]

	For there it is, crack'd in a hundred shivers.
	Mark, silent king, the moral of this sport,
	How soon my sorrow hath destroy'd my face.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE	The shadow of your sorrow hath destroy'd
	The shadow or your face.

KING RICHARD II	Say that again.
	The shadow of my sorrow! ha! let's see:
	'Tis very true, my grief lies all within;
	And these external manners of laments
	Are merely shadows to the unseen grief
	That swells with silence in the tortured soul;
	There lies the substance: and I thank thee, king,
	For thy great bounty, that not only givest
	Me cause to wail but teachest me the way
	How to lament the cause. I'll beg one boon,
	And then be gone and trouble you no more.
	Shall I obtain it?

HENRY BOLINGBROKE	                  Name it, fair cousin.

KING RICHARD II	'Fair cousin'? I am greater than a king:
	For when I was a king, my flatterers
	Were then but subjects; being now a subject,
	I have a king here to my flatterer.
	Being so great, I have no need to beg.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE	Yet ask.

KING RICHARD II	And shall I have?

HENRY BOLINGBROKE	You shall.

KING RICHARD II	Then give me leave to go.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE	Whither?

KING RICHARD II	Whither you will, so I were from your sights.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE	Go, some of you convey him to the Tower.

KING RICHARD II	O, good! convey? conveyers are you all,
	That rise thus nimbly by a true king's fall.

	[Exeunt KING RICHARD II, some Lords, and a Guard]

HENRY BOLINGBROKE	On Wednesday next we solemnly set down
	Our coronation: lords, prepare yourselves.

	[Exeunt all except the BISHOP OF CARLISLE, the Abbot
	of Westminster, and DUKE OF AUMERLE]

Abbot	A woeful pageant have we here beheld.

BISHOP OF CARLISLE	The woe's to come; the children yet unborn.
	Shall feel this day as sharp to them as thorn.

DUKE OF AUMERLE	You holy clergymen, is there no plot
	To rid the realm of this pernicious blot?

Abbot	My lord,
	Before I freely speak my mind herein,
	You shall not only take the sacrament
	To bury mine intents, but also to effect
	Whatever I shall happen to devise.
	I see your brows are full of discontent,
	Your hearts of sorrow and your eyes of tears:
	Come home with me to supper; and I'll lay
	A plot shall show us all a merry day.

	[Exeunt]




	KING RICHARD II


ACT V



SCENE I	London. A street leading to the Tower.


	[Enter QUEEN and Ladies]

QUEEN	This way the king will come; this is the way
	To Julius Caesar's ill-erected tower,
	To whose flint bosom my condemned lord
	Is doom'd a prisoner by proud Bolingbroke:
	Here let us rest, if this rebellious earth
	Have any resting for her true king's queen.

	[Enter KING RICHARD II and Guard]

	But soft, but see, or rather do not see,
	My fair rose wither: yet look up, behold,
	That you in pity may dissolve to dew,
	And wash him fresh again with true-love tears.
	Ah, thou, the model where old Troy did stand,
	Thou map of honour, thou King Richard's tomb,
	And not King Richard; thou most beauteous inn,
	Why should hard-favour'd grief be lodged in thee,
	When triumph is become an alehouse guest?

KING RICHARD II	Join not with grief, fair woman, do not so,
	To make my end too sudden: learn, good soul,
	To think our former state a happy dream;
	From which awaked, the truth of what we are
	Shows us but this: I am sworn brother, sweet,
	To grim Necessity, and he and I
	Will keep a league till death. Hie thee to France
	And cloister thee in some religious house:
	Our holy lives must win a new world's crown,
	Which our profane hours here have stricken down.

QUEEN	What, is my Richard both in shape and mind
	Transform'd and weaken'd? hath Bolingbroke deposed
	Thine intellect? hath he been in thy heart?
	The lion dying thrusteth forth his paw,
	And wounds the earth, if nothing else, with rage
	To be o'erpower'd; and wilt thou, pupil-like,
	Take thy correction mildly, kiss the rod,
	And fawn on rage with base humility,
	Which art a lion and a king of beasts?

KING RICHARD II	A king of beasts, indeed; if aught but beasts,
	I had been still a happy king of men.
	Good sometime queen, prepare thee hence for France:
	Think I am dead and that even here thou takest,
	As from my death-bed, thy last living leave.
	In winter's tedious nights sit by the fire
	With good old folks and let them tell thee tales
	Of woeful ages long ago betid;
	And ere thou bid good night, to quit their griefs,
	Tell thou the lamentable tale of me
	And send the hearers weeping to their beds:
	For why, the senseless brands will sympathize
	The heavy accent of thy moving tongue
	And in compassion weep the fire out;
	And some will mourn in ashes, some coal-black,
	For the deposing of a rightful king.

	[Enter NORTHUMBERLAND and others]

NORTHUMBERLAND	My lord, the mind of Bolingbroke is changed:
	You must to Pomfret, not unto the Tower.
	And, madam, there is order ta'en for you;
	With all swift speed you must away to France.

KING RICHARD II	Northumberland, thou ladder wherewithal
	The mounting Bolingbroke ascends my throne,
	The time shall not be many hours of age
	More than it is ere foul sin gathering head
	Shalt break into corruption: thou shalt think,
	Though he divide the realm and give thee half,
	It is too little, helping him to all;
	And he shall think that thou, which know'st the way
	To plant unrightful kings, wilt know again,
	Being ne'er so little urged, another way
	To pluck him headlong from the usurped throne.
	The love of wicked men converts to fear;
	That fear to hate, and hate turns one or both
	To worthy danger and deserved death.

NORTHUMBERLAND	My guilt be on my head, and there an end.
	Take leave and part; for you must part forthwith.

KING RICHARD II	Doubly divorced! Bad men, you violate
	A twofold marriage, 'twixt my crown and me,
	And then betwixt me and my married wife.
	Let me unkiss the oath 'twixt thee and me;
	And yet not so, for with a kiss 'twas made.
	Part us, Northumberland; I toward the north,
	Where shivering cold and sickness pines the clime;
	My wife to France: from whence, set forth in pomp,
	She came adorned hither like sweet May,
	Sent back like Hallowmas or short'st of day.

QUEEN	And must we be divided? must we part?

KING RICHARD II	Ay, hand from hand, my love, and heart from heart.

QUEEN	Banish us both and send the king with me.

NORTHUMBERLAND	That were some love but little policy.

QUEEN	Then whither he goes, thither let me go.

KING RICHARD II	So two, together weeping, make one woe.
	Weep thou for me in France, I for thee here;
	Better far off than near, be ne'er the near.
	Go, count thy way with sighs; I mine with groans.

QUEEN	So longest way shall have the longest moans.

KING RICHARD II	Twice for one step I'll groan, the way being short,
	And piece the way out with a heavy heart.
	Come, come, in wooing sorrow let's be brief,
	Since, wedding it, there is such length in grief;
	One kiss shall stop our mouths, and dumbly part;
	Thus give I mine, and thus take I thy heart.

QUEEN	Give me mine own again; 'twere no good part
	To take on me to keep and kill thy heart.
	So, now I have mine own again, be gone,
	That I might strive to kill it with a groan.

KING RICHARD II	We make woe wanton with this fond delay:
	Once more, adieu; the rest let sorrow say.

	[Exeunt]




	KING RICHARD II


ACT V



SCENE II	The DUKE OF YORK's palace.


	[Enter DUKE OF YORK and DUCHESS OF YORK]

DUCHESS OF YORK	My lord, you told me you would tell the rest,
	When weeping made you break the story off,
	of our two cousins coming into London.

DUKE OF YORK	Where did I leave?

DUCHESS OF YORK	                  At that sad stop, my lord,
	Where rude misgovern'd hands from windows' tops
	Threw dust and rubbish on King Richard's head.

DUKE OF YORK	Then, as I said, the duke, great Bolingbroke,
	Mounted upon a hot and fiery steed
	Which his aspiring rider seem'd to know,
	With slow but stately pace kept on his course,
	Whilst all tongues cried 'God save thee,
	Bolingbroke!'
	You would have thought the very windows spake,
	So many greedy looks of young and old
	Through casements darted their desiring eyes
	Upon his visage, and that all the walls
	With painted imagery had said at once
	'Jesu preserve thee! welcome, Bolingbroke!'
	Whilst he, from the one side to the other turning,
	Bareheaded, lower than his proud steed's neck,
	Bespake them thus: 'I thank you, countrymen:'
	And thus still doing, thus he pass'd along.

DUCHESS OF YORK	Alack, poor Richard! where rode he the whilst?

DUKE OF YORK	As in a theatre, the eyes of men,
	After a well-graced actor leaves the stage,
	Are idly bent on him that enters next,
	Thinking his prattle to be tedious;
	Even so, or with much more contempt, men's eyes
	Did scowl on gentle Richard; no man cried 'God save him!'
	No joyful tongue gave him his welcome home:
	But dust was thrown upon his sacred head:
	Which with such gentle sorrow he shook off,
	His face still combating with tears and smiles,
	The badges of his grief and patience,
	That had not God, for some strong purpose, steel'd
	The hearts of men, they must perforce have melted
	And barbarism itself have pitied him.
	But heaven hath a hand in these events,
	To whose high will we bound our calm contents.
	To Bolingbroke are we sworn subjects now,
	Whose state and honour I for aye allow.

DUCHESS OF YORK	Here comes my son Aumerle.

DUKE OF YORK	Aumerle that was;
	But that is lost for being Richard's friend,
	And, madam, you must call him Rutland now:
	I am in parliament pledge for his truth
	And lasting fealty to the new-made king.

	[Enter DUKE OF AUMERLE]

DUCHESS OF YORK	Welcome, my son: who are the violets now
	That strew the green lap of the new come spring?

DUKE OF AUMERLE	Madam, I know not, nor I greatly care not:
	God knows I had as lief be none as one.

DUKE OF YORK	Well, bear you well in this new spring of time,
	Lest you be cropp'd before you come to prime.
	What news from Oxford? hold those justs and triumphs?

DUKE OF AUMERLE	For aught I know, my lord, they do.

DUKE OF YORK	You will be there, I know.

DUKE OF AUMERLE	If God prevent not, I purpose so.

DUKE OF YORK	What seal is that, that hangs without thy bosom?
	Yea, look'st thou pale? let me see the writing.

DUKE OF AUMERLE	My lord, 'tis nothing.

DUKE OF YORK	No matter, then, who see it;
	I will be satisfied; let me see the writing.

DUKE OF AUMERLE	I do beseech your grace to pardon me:
	It is a matter of small consequence,
	Which for some reasons I would not have seen.

DUKE OF YORK	Which for some reasons, sir, I mean to see.
	I fear, I fear,--

DUCHESS OF YORK	                  What should you fear?
	'Tis nothing but some bond, that he is enter'd into
	For gay apparel 'gainst the triumph day.

DUKE OF YORK	Bound to himself! what doth he with a bond
	That he is bound to? Wife, thou art a fool.
	Boy, let me see the writing.

DUKE OF AUMERLE	I do beseech you, pardon me; I may not show it.

DUKE OF YORK	I will be satisfied; let me see it, I say.

	[He plucks it out of his bosom and reads it]

	Treason! foul treason! Villain! traitor! slave!

DUCHESS OF YORK	What is the matter, my lord?

DUKE OF YORK	Ho! who is within there?

	[Enter a Servant]

		    Saddle my horse.
	God for his mercy, what treachery is here!

DUCHESS OF YORK	Why, what is it, my lord?

DUKE OF YORK	Give me my boots, I say; saddle my horse.
	Now, by mine honour, by my life, by my troth,
	I will appeach the villain.

DUCHESS OF YORK	What is the matter?

DUKE OF YORK	Peace, foolish woman.

DUCHESS OF YORK	I will not peace. What is the matter, Aumerle.

DUKE OF AUMERLE	Good mother, be content; it is no more
	Than my poor life must answer.

DUCHESS OF YORK	Thy life answer!

DUKE OF YORK	Bring me my boots: I will unto the king.

	[Re-enter Servant with boots]

DUCHESS OF YORK	Strike him, Aumerle. Poor boy, thou art amazed.
	Hence, villain! never more come in my sight.

DUKE OF YORK	Give me my boots, I say.

DUCHESS OF YORK	Why, York, what wilt thou do?
	Wilt thou not hide the trespass of thine own?
	Have we more sons? or are we like to have?
	Is not my teeming date drunk up with time?
	And wilt thou pluck my fair son from mine age,
	And rob me of a happy mother's name?
	Is he not like thee? is he not thine own?

DUKE OF YORK	Thou fond mad woman,
	Wilt thou conceal this dark conspiracy?
	A dozen of them here have ta'en the sacrament,
	And interchangeably set down their hands,
	To kill the king at Oxford.

DUCHESS OF YORK	He shall be none;
	We'll keep him here: then what is that to him?

DUKE OF YORK	Away, fond woman! were he twenty times my son,
	I would appeach him.

DUCHESS OF YORK	Hadst thou groan'd for him
	As I have done, thou wouldst be more pitiful.
	But now I know thy mind; thou dost suspect
	That I have been disloyal to thy bed,
	And that he is a bastard, not thy son:
	Sweet York, sweet husband, be not of that mind:
	He is as like thee as a man may be,
	Not like to me, or any of my kin,
	And yet I love him.

DUKE OF YORK	Make way, unruly woman!

	[Exit]

DUCHESS OF YORK	After, Aumerle! mount thee upon his horse;
	Spur post, and get before him to the king,
	And beg thy pardon ere he do accuse thee.
	I'll not be long behind; though I be old,
	I doubt not but to ride as fast as York:
	And never will I rise up from the ground
	Till Bolingbroke have pardon'd thee. Away, be gone!

	[Exeunt]




	KING RICHARD II


ACT V



SCENE III	A royal palace.


	[Enter HENRY BOLINGBROKE, HENRY PERCY, and other Lords]

HENRY BOLINGBROKE	Can no man tell me of my unthrifty son?
	'Tis full three months since I did see him last;
	If any plague hang over us, 'tis he.
	I would to God, my lords, he might be found:
	Inquire at London, 'mongst the taverns there,
	For there, they say, he daily doth frequent,
	With unrestrained loose companions,
	Even such, they say, as stand in narrow lanes,
	And beat our watch, and rob our passengers;
	Which he, young wanton and effeminate boy,
	Takes on the point of honour to support
	So dissolute a crew.

HENRY PERCY	My lord, some two days since I saw the prince,
	And told him of those triumphs held at Oxford.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE	And what said the gallant?

HENRY PERCY	His answer was, he would unto the stews,
	And from the common'st creature pluck a glove,
	And wear it as a favour; and with that
	He would unhorse the lustiest challenger.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE	As dissolute as desperate; yet through both
	I see some sparks of better hope, which elder years
	May happily bring forth. But who comes here?

	[Enter DUKE OF AUMERLE]

DUKE OF AUMERLE	Where is the king?

HENRY BOLINGBROKE	What means our cousin, that he stares and looks
	So wildly?

DUKE OF AUMERLE	God save your grace! I do beseech your majesty,
	To have some conference with your grace alone.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE	Withdraw yourselves, and leave us here alone.

	[Exeunt HENRY PERCY and Lords]

	What is the matter with our cousin now?

DUKE OF AUMERLE	For ever may my knees grow to the earth,
	My tongue cleave to my roof within my mouth
	Unless a pardon ere I rise or speak.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE	Intended or committed was this fault?
	If on the first, how heinous e'er it be,
	To win thy after-love I pardon thee.

DUKE OF AUMERLE	Then give me leave that I may turn the key,
	That no man enter till my tale be done.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE	Have thy desire.

DUKE OF YORK	[Within]  My liege, beware; look to thyself;
	Thou hast a traitor in thy presence there.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE	Villain, I'll make thee safe.

	[Drawing]

DUKE OF AUMERLE	Stay thy revengeful hand; thou hast no cause to fear.

DUKE OF YORK	[Within]  Open the door, secure, foolhardy king:
	Shall I for love speak treason to thy face?
	Open the door, or I will break it open.

	[Enter DUKE OF YORK]

HENRY BOLINGBROKE	What is the matter, uncle? speak;
	Recover breath; tell us how near is danger,
	That we may arm us to encounter it.

DUKE OF YORK	Peruse this writing here, and thou shalt know
	The treason that my haste forbids me show.

DUKE OF AUMERLE	Remember, as thou read'st, thy promise pass'd:
	I do repent me; read not my name there
	My heart is not confederate with my hand.

DUKE OF YORK	It was, villain, ere thy hand did set it down.
	I tore it from the traitor's bosom, king;
	Fear, and not love, begets his penitence:
	Forget to pity him, lest thy pity prove
	A serpent that will sting thee to the heart.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE	O heinous, strong and bold conspiracy!
	O loyal father of a treacherous son!
	Thou sheer, immaculate and silver fountain,
	From when this stream through muddy passages
	Hath held his current and defiled himself!
	Thy overflow of good converts to bad,
	And thy abundant goodness shall excuse
	This deadly blot in thy digressing son.

DUKE OF YORK	So shall my virtue be his vice's bawd;
	And he shall spend mine honour with his shame,
	As thriftless sons their scraping fathers' gold.
	Mine honour lives when his dishonour dies,
	Or my shamed life in his dishonour lies:
	Thou kill'st me in his life; giving him breath,
	The traitor lives, the true man's put to death.

DUCHESS OF YORK	[Within]  What ho, my liege! for God's sake,
	let me in.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE	What shrill-voiced suppliant makes this eager cry?

DUCHESS OF YORK	A woman, and thy aunt, great king; 'tis I.
	Speak with me, pity me, open the door.
	A beggar begs that never begg'd before.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE	Our scene is alter'd from a serious thing,
	And now changed to 'The Beggar and the King.'
	My dangerous cousin, let your mother in:
	I know she is come to pray for your foul sin.

DUKE OF YORK	If thou do pardon, whosoever pray,
	More sins for this forgiveness prosper may.
	This fester'd joint cut off, the rest rest sound;
	This let alone will all the rest confound.

	[Enter DUCHESS OF YORK]

DUCHESS OF YORK	O king, believe not this hard-hearted man!
	Love loving not itself none other can.

DUKE OF YORK	Thou frantic woman, what dost thou make here?
	Shall thy old dugs once more a traitor rear?

DUCHESS OF YORK	Sweet York, be patient. Hear me, gentle liege.

	[Kneels]

HENRY BOLINGBROKE	Rise up, good aunt.

DUCHESS OF YORK	Not yet, I thee beseech:
	For ever will I walk upon my knees,
	And never see day that the happy sees,
	Till thou give joy; until thou bid me joy,
	By pardoning Rutland, my transgressing boy.

DUKE OF AUMERLE	Unto my mother's prayers I bend my knee.

DUKE OF YORK	Against them both my true joints bended be.
	Ill mayst thou thrive, if thou grant any grace!

DUCHESS OF YORK	Pleads he in earnest? look upon his face;
	His eyes do drop no tears, his prayers are in jest;
	His words come from his mouth, ours from our breast:
	He prays but faintly and would be denied;
	We pray with heart and soul and all beside:
	His weary joints would gladly rise, I know;
	Our knees shall kneel till to the ground they grow:
	His prayers are full of false hypocrisy;
	Ours of true zeal and deep integrity.
	Our prayers do out-pray his; then let them have
	That mercy which true prayer ought to have.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE	Good aunt, stand up.

DUCHESS OF YORK	Nay, do not say, 'stand up;'
	Say, 'pardon' first, and afterwards 'stand up.'
	And if I were thy nurse, thy tongue to teach,
	'Pardon' should be the first word of thy speech.
	I never long'd to hear a word till now;
	Say 'pardon,' king; let pity teach thee how:
	The word is short, but not so short as sweet;
	No word like 'pardon' for kings' mouths so meet.

DUKE OF YORK	Speak it in French, king; say, 'pardonne moi.'

DUCHESS OF YORK	Dost thou teach pardon pardon to destroy?
	Ah, my sour husband, my hard-hearted lord,
	That set'st the word itself against the word!
	Speak 'pardon' as 'tis current in our land;
	The chopping French we do not understand.
	Thine eye begins to speak; set thy tongue there;
	Or in thy piteous heart plant thou thine ear;
	That hearing how our plaints and prayers do pierce,
	Pity may move thee 'pardon' to rehearse.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE	Good aunt, stand up.

DUCHESS OF YORK	I do not sue to stand;
	Pardon is all the suit I have in hand.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE	I pardon him, as God shall pardon me.

DUCHESS OF YORK	O happy vantage of a kneeling knee!
	Yet am I sick for fear: speak it again;
	Twice saying 'pardon' doth not pardon twain,
	But makes one pardon strong.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE	With all my heart
	I pardon him.

DUCHESS OF YORK	                  A god on earth thou art.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE	But for our trusty brother-in-law and the abbot,
	With all the rest of that consorted crew,
	Destruction straight shall dog them at the heels.
	Good uncle, help to order several powers
	To Oxford, or where'er these traitors are:
	They shall not live within this world, I swear,
	But I will have them, if I once know where.
	Uncle, farewell: and, cousin too, adieu:
	Your mother well hath pray'd, and prove you true.

DUCHESS OF YORK	Come, my old son: I pray God make thee new.

	[Exeunt]




	KING RICHARD II


ACT V



SCENE IV	The same.


	[Enter EXTON and Servant]

EXTON	Didst thou not mark the king, what words he spake,
	'Have I no friend will rid me of this living fear?'
	Was it not so?

Servant	                  These were his very words.

EXTON	'Have I no friend?' quoth he: he spake it twice,
	And urged it twice together, did he not?

Servant	He did.

EXTON	And speaking it, he wistly look'd on me,
	And who should say, 'I would thou wert the man'
	That would divorce this terror from my heart;'
	Meaning the king at Pomfret. Come, let's go:
	I am the king's friend, and will rid his foe.

	[Exeunt]




	KING RICHARD II


ACT V



SCENE V	Pomfret castle.


	[Enter KING RICHARD]

KING RICHARD II	I have been studying how I may compare
	This prison where I live unto the world:
	And for because the world is populous
	And here is not a creature but myself,
	I cannot do it; yet I'll hammer it out.
	My brain I'll prove the female to my soul,
	My soul the father; and these two beget
	A generation of still-breeding thoughts,
	And these same thoughts people this little world,
	In humours like the people of this world,
	For no thought is contented. The better sort,
	As thoughts of things divine, are intermix'd
	With scruples and do set the word itself
	Against the word:
	As thus, 'Come, little ones,' and then again,
	'It is as hard to come as for a camel
	To thread the postern of a small needle's eye.'
	Thoughts tending to ambition, they do plot
	Unlikely wonders; how these vain weak nails
	May tear a passage through the flinty ribs
	Of this hard world, my ragged prison walls,
	And, for they cannot, die in their own pride.
	Thoughts tending to content flatter themselves
	That they are not the first of fortune's slaves,
	Nor shall not be the last; like silly beggars
	Who sitting in the stocks refuge their shame,
	That many have and others must sit there;
	And in this thought they find a kind of ease,
	Bearing their own misfortunes on the back
	Of such as have before endured the like.
	Thus play I in one person many people,
	And none contented: sometimes am I king;
	Then treasons make me wish myself a beggar,
	And so I am: then crushing penury
	Persuades me I was better when a king;
	Then am I king'd again: and by and by
	Think that I am unking'd by Bolingbroke,
	And straight am nothing: but whate'er I be,
	Nor I nor any man that but man is
	With nothing shall be pleased, till he be eased
	With being nothing. Music do I hear?

	[Music]

	Ha, ha! keep time: how sour sweet music is,
	When time is broke and no proportion kept!
	So is it in the music of men's lives.
	And here have I the daintiness of ear
	To cheque time broke in a disorder'd string;
	But for the concord of my state and time
	Had not an ear to hear my true time broke.
	I wasted time, and now doth time waste me;
	For now hath time made me his numbering clock:
	My thoughts are minutes; and with sighs they jar
	Their watches on unto mine eyes, the outward watch,
	Whereto my finger, like a dial's point,
	Is pointing still, in cleansing them from tears.
	Now sir, the sound that tells what hour it is
	Are clamorous groans, which strike upon my heart,
	Which is the bell: so sighs and tears and groans
	Show minutes, times, and hours: but my time
	Runs posting on in Bolingbroke's proud joy,
	While I stand fooling here, his Jack o' the clock.
	This music mads me; let it sound no more;
	For though it have holp madmen to their wits,
	In me it seems it will make wise men mad.
	Yet blessing on his heart that gives it me!
	For 'tis a sign of love; and love to Richard
	Is a strange brooch in this all-hating world.

	[Enter a Groom of the Stable]

Groom	Hail, royal prince!

KING RICHARD II	Thanks, noble peer;
	The cheapest of us is ten groats too dear.
	What art thou? and how comest thou hither,
	Where no man never comes but that sad dog
	That brings me food to make misfortune live?

Groom	I was a poor groom of thy stable, king,
	When thou wert king; who, travelling towards York,
	With much ado at length have gotten leave
	To look upon my sometimes royal master's face.
	O, how it yearn'd my heart when I beheld
	In London streets, that coronation-day,
	When Bolingbroke rode on roan Barbary,
	That horse that thou so often hast bestrid,
	That horse that I so carefully have dress'd!

KING RICHARD II	Rode he on Barbary? Tell me, gentle friend,
	How went he under him?

Groom	So proudly as if he disdain'd the ground.

KING RICHARD II	So proud that Bolingbroke was on his back!
	That jade hath eat bread from my royal hand;
	This hand hath made him proud with clapping him.
	Would he not stumble? would he not fall down,
	Since pride must have a fall, and break the neck
	Of that proud man that did usurp his back?
	Forgiveness, horse! why do I rail on thee,
	Since thou, created to be awed by man,
	Wast born to bear? I was not made a horse;
	And yet I bear a burthen like an ass,
	Spurr'd, gall'd and tired by jouncing Bolingbroke.

	[Enter Keeper, with a dish]

Keeper	Fellow, give place; here is no longer stay.

KING RICHARD II	If thou love me, 'tis time thou wert away.

Groom	What my tongue dares not, that my heart shall say.

	[Exit]

Keeper	My lord, will't please you to fall to?

KING RICHARD II	Taste of it first, as thou art wont to do.

Keeper	My lord, I dare not: Sir Pierce of Exton, who
	lately came from the king, commands the contrary.

KING RICHARD II	The devil take Henry of Lancaster and thee!
	Patience is stale, and I am weary of it.

	[Beats the keeper]

Keeper	Help, help, help!

	[Enter EXTON and Servants, armed]

KING RICHARD II	How now! what means death in this rude assault?
	Villain, thy own hand yields thy death's instrument.

	[Snatching an axe from a Servant and killing him]

	Go thou, and fill another room in hell.

	[He kills another. Then Exton strikes him down]

	That hand shall burn in never-quenching fire
	That staggers thus my person. Exton, thy fierce hand
	Hath with the king's blood stain'd the king's own land.
	Mount, mount, my soul! thy seat is up on high;
	Whilst my gross flesh sinks downward, here to die.

	[Dies]

EXTON	As full of valour as of royal blood:
	Both have I spill'd; O would the deed were good!
	For now the devil, that told me I did well,
	Says that this deed is chronicled in hell.
	This dead king to the living king I'll bear
	Take hence the rest, and give them burial here.

	[Exeunt]




	KING RICHARD II


ACT V



SCENE VI	Windsor castle.


	[Flourish. Enter HENRY BOLINGBROKE, DUKE OF YORK,
	with other Lords, and Attendants]

HENRY BOLINGBROKE	Kind uncle York, the latest news we hear
	Is that the rebels have consumed with fire
	Our town of Cicester in Gloucestershire;
	But whether they be ta'en or slain we hear not.

	[Enter NORTHUMBERLAND]

	Welcome, my lord	what is the news?

NORTHUMBERLAND	First, to thy sacred state wish I all happiness.
	The next news is, I have to London sent
	The heads of Oxford, Salisbury, Blunt, and Kent:
	The manner of their taking may appear
	At large discoursed in this paper here.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE	We thank thee, gentle Percy, for thy pains;
	And to thy worth will add right worthy gains.

	[Enter LORD FITZWATER]

LORD FITZWATER	My lord, I have from Oxford sent to London
	The heads of Brocas and Sir Bennet Seely,
	Two of the dangerous consorted traitors
	That sought at Oxford thy dire overthrow.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE	Thy pains, Fitzwater, shall not be forgot;
	Right noble is thy merit, well I wot.

	[Enter HENRY PERCY, and the BISHOP OF CARLISLE]

HENRY PERCY	The grand conspirator, Abbot of Westminster,
	With clog of conscience and sour melancholy
	Hath yielded up his body to the grave;
	But here is Carlisle living, to abide
	Thy kingly doom and sentence of his pride.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE	Carlisle, this is your doom:
	Choose out some secret place, some reverend room,
	More than thou hast, and with it joy thy life;
	So as thou livest in peace, die free from strife:
	For though mine enemy thou hast ever been,
	High sparks of honour in thee have I seen.

	[Enter EXTON, with persons bearing a coffin]

EXTON	Great king, within this coffin I present
	Thy buried fear: herein all breathless lies
	The mightiest of thy greatest enemies,
	Richard of Bordeaux, by me hither brought.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE	Exton, I thank thee not; for thou hast wrought
	A deed of slander with thy fatal hand
	Upon my head and all this famous land.

EXTON	From your own mouth, my lord, did I this deed.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE	They love not poison that do poison need,
	Nor do I thee: though I did wish him dead,
	I hate the murderer, love him murdered.
	The guilt of conscience take thou for thy labour,
	But neither my good word nor princely favour:
	With Cain go wander through shades of night,
	And never show thy head by day nor light.
	Lords, I protest, my soul is full of woe,
	That blood should sprinkle me to make me grow:
	Come, mourn with me for that I do lament,
	And put on sullen black incontinent:
	I'll make a voyage to the Holy Land,
	To wash this blood off from my guilty hand:
	March sadly after; grace my mournings here;
	In weeping after this untimely bier.

	[Exeunt]


	KING JOHN
	

	DRAMATIS PERSONAE


KING JOHN:

PRINCE HENRY	son to the king.

ARTHUR	Duke of Bretagne, nephew to the king.

The Earl of
PEMBROKE	(PEMBROKE:)

The Earl of ESSEX	(ESSEX:)

The Earl of
SALISBURY	(SALISBURY:)

The Lord BIGOT	(BIGOT:)

HUBERT DE BURGH	(HUBERT:)

ROBERT
FAULCONBRIDGE	Son to Sir Robert Faulconbridge. (ROBERT:)

PHILIP the BASTARD	his half-brother. (BASTARD:)

JAMES GURNEY	servant to Lady Faulconbridge. (GURNEY:)

PETER Of Pomfret	a prophet. (PETER:)

PHILIP	King of France. (KING PHILIP:)

LEWIS	the Dauphin.

LYMOGES	Duke of AUSTRIA. (AUSTRIA:)

CARDINAL PANDULPH	the Pope's legate.

MELUN	a French Lord.

CHATILLON	ambassador from France to King John.

QUEEN ELINOR	mother to King John.

CONSTANCE	mother to Arthur.

BLANCH of Spain	niece to King John. (BLANCH:)

LADY FAULCONBRIDGE:

	Lords, Citizens of Angiers, Sheriff, Heralds,
	Officers, Soldiers, Messengers, and other Attendants.
	(First Citizen:)
	(French Herald:)
	(English Herald:)
	(First Executioner:)
	(Messenger:)


SCENE	Partly in England, and partly in France.




	KING JOHN


ACT I



SCENE I	KING JOHN'S palace.


	[Enter KING JOHN, QUEEN ELINOR, PEMBROKE, ESSEX,
	SALISBURY, and others, with CHATILLON]

KING JOHN	Now, say, Chatillon, what would France with us?

CHATILLON	Thus, after greeting, speaks the King of France
	In my behavior to the majesty,
	The borrow'd majesty, of England here.

QUEEN ELINOR	A strange beginning: 'borrow'd majesty!'

KING JOHN	Silence, good mother; hear the embassy.

CHATILLON	Philip of France, in right and true behalf
	Of thy deceased brother Geffrey's son,
	Arthur Plantagenet, lays most lawful claim
	To this fair island and the territories,
	To Ireland, Poictiers, Anjou, Touraine, Maine,
	Desiring thee to lay aside the sword
	Which sways usurpingly these several titles,
	And put these same into young Arthur's hand,
	Thy nephew and right royal sovereign.

KING JOHN	What follows if we disallow of this?

CHATILLON	The proud control of fierce and bloody war,
	To enforce these rights so forcibly withheld.

KING JOHN	Here have we war for war and blood for blood,
	Controlment for controlment: so answer France.

CHATILLON	Then take my king's defiance from my mouth,
	The farthest limit of my embassy.

KING JOHN	Bear mine to him, and so depart in peace:
	Be thou as lightning in the eyes of France;
	For ere thou canst report I will be there,
	The thunder of my cannon shall be heard:
	So hence! Be thou the trumpet of our wrath
	And sullen presage of your own decay.
	An honourable conduct let him have:
	Pembroke, look to 't. Farewell, Chatillon.

	[Exeunt CHATILLON and PEMBROKE]

QUEEN ELINOR	What now, my son! have I not ever said
	How that ambitious Constance would not cease
	Till she had kindled France and all the world,
	Upon the right and party of her son?
	This might have been prevented and made whole
	With very easy arguments of love,
	Which now the manage of two kingdoms must
	With fearful bloody issue arbitrate.

KING JOHN	Our strong possession and our right for us.

QUEEN ELINOR	Your strong possession much more than your right,
	Or else it must go wrong with you and me:
	So much my conscience whispers in your ear,
	Which none but heaven and you and I shall hear.

	[Enter a Sheriff]

ESSEX	My liege, here is the strangest controversy
	Come from country to be judged by you,
	That e'er I heard: shall I produce the men?

KING JOHN	Let them approach.
	Our abbeys and our priories shall pay
	This expedition's charge.

	[Enter ROBERT and the BASTARD]

		    What men are you?

BASTARD	Your faithful subject I, a gentleman
	Born in Northamptonshire and eldest son,
	As I suppose, to Robert Faulconbridge,
	A soldier, by the honour-giving hand
	Of Coeur-de-lion knighted in the field.

KING JOHN	What art thou?

ROBERT	The son and heir to that same Faulconbridge.

KING JOHN	Is that the elder, and art thou the heir?
	You came not of one mother then, it seems.

BASTARD	Most certain of one mother, mighty king;
	That is well known; and, as I think, one father:
	But for the certain knowledge of that truth
	I put you o'er to heaven and to my mother:
	Of that I doubt, as all men's children may.

QUEEN ELINOR	Out on thee, rude man! thou dost shame thy mother
	And wound her honour with this diffidence.

BASTARD	I, madam? no, I have no reason for it;
	That is my brother's plea and none of mine;
	The which if he can prove, a' pops me out
	At least from fair five hundred pound a year:
	Heaven guard my mother's honour and my land!

KING JOHN	A good blunt fellow. Why, being younger born,
	Doth he lay claim to thine inheritance?

BASTARD	I know not why, except to get the land.
	But once he slander'd me with bastardy:
	But whether I be as true begot or no,
	That still I lay upon my mother's head,
	But that I am as well begot, my liege,--
	Fair fall the bones that took the pains for me!--
	Compare our faces and be judge yourself.
	If old sir Robert did beget us both
	And were our father and this son like him,
	O old sir Robert, father, on my knee
	I give heaven thanks I was not like to thee!

KING JOHN	Why, what a madcap hath heaven lent us here!

QUEEN ELINOR	He hath a trick of Coeur-de-lion's face;
	The accent of his tongue affecteth him.
	Do you not read some tokens of my son
	In the large composition of this man?

KING JOHN	Mine eye hath well examined his parts
	And finds them perfect Richard. Sirrah, speak,
	What doth move you to claim your brother's land?

BASTARD	Because he hath a half-face, like my father.
	With half that face would he have all my land:
	A half-faced groat five hundred pound a year!

ROBERT	My gracious liege, when that my father lived,
	Your brother did employ my father much,--

BASTARD	Well, sir, by this you cannot get my land:
	Your tale must be how he employ'd my mother.

ROBERT	And once dispatch'd him in an embassy
	To Germany, there with the emperor
	To treat of high affairs touching that time.
	The advantage of his absence took the king
	And in the mean time sojourn'd at my father's;
	Where how he did prevail I shame to speak,
	But truth is truth: large lengths of seas and shores
	Between my father and my mother lay,
	As I have heard my father speak himself,
	When this same lusty gentleman was got.
	Upon his death-bed he by will bequeath'd
	His lands to me, and took it on his death
	That this my mother's son was none of his;
	And if he were, he came into the world
	Full fourteen weeks before the course of time.
	Then, good my liege, let me have what is mine,
	My father's land, as was my father's will.

KING JOHN	Sirrah, your brother is legitimate;
	Your father's wife did after wedlock bear him,
	And if she did play false, the fault was hers;
	Which fault lies on the hazards of all husbands
	That marry wives. Tell me, how if my brother,
	Who, as you say, took pains to get this son,
	Had of your father claim'd this son for his?
	In sooth, good friend, your father might have kept
	This calf bred from his cow from all the world;
	In sooth he might; then, if he were my brother's,
	My brother might not claim him; nor your father,
	Being none of his, refuse him: this concludes;
	My mother's son did get your father's heir;
	Your father's heir must have your father's land.

ROBERT	Shall then my father's will be of no force
	To dispossess that child which is not his?

BASTARD	Of no more force to dispossess me, sir,
	Than was his will to get me, as I think.

QUEEN ELINOR	Whether hadst thou rather be a Faulconbridge
	And like thy brother, to enjoy thy land,
	Or the reputed son of Coeur-de-lion,
	Lord of thy presence and no land beside?

BASTARD	Madam, an if my brother had my shape,
	And I had his, sir Robert's his, like him;
	And if my legs were two such riding-rods,
	My arms such eel-skins stuff'd, my face so thin
	That in mine ear I durst not stick a rose
	Lest men should say 'Look, where three-farthings goes!'
	And, to his shape, were heir to all this land,
	Would I might never stir from off this place,
	I would give it every foot to have this face;
	I would not be sir Nob in any case.

QUEEN ELINOR	I like thee well: wilt thou forsake thy fortune,
	Bequeath thy land to him and follow me?
	I am a soldier and now bound to France.

BASTARD	Brother, take you my land, I'll take my chance.
	Your face hath got five hundred pound a year,
	Yet sell your face for five pence and 'tis dear.
	Madam, I'll follow you unto the death.

QUEEN ELINOR	Nay, I would have you go before me thither.

BASTARD	Our country manners give our betters way.

KING JOHN	What is thy name?

BASTARD	Philip, my liege, so is my name begun,
	Philip, good old sir Robert's wife's eldest son.

KING JOHN	From henceforth bear his name whose form thou bear'st:
	Kneel thou down Philip, but rise more great,
	Arise sir Richard and Plantagenet.

BASTARD	Brother by the mother's side, give me your hand:
	My father gave me honour, yours gave land.
	Now blessed by the hour, by night or day,
	When I was got, sir Robert was away!

QUEEN ELINOR	The very spirit of Plantagenet!
	I am thy grandam, Richard; call me so.

BASTARD	Madam, by chance but not by truth; what though?
	Something about, a little from the right,
	In at the window, or else o'er the hatch:
	Who dares not stir by day must walk by night,
	And have is have, however men do catch:
	Near or far off, well won is still well shot,
	And I am I, howe'er I was begot.

KING JOHN	Go, Faulconbridge: now hast thou thy desire;
	A landless knight makes thee a landed squire.
	Come, madam, and come, Richard, we must speed
	For France, for France, for it is more than need.

BASTARD	Brother, adieu: good fortune come to thee!
	For thou wast got i' the way of honesty.

	[Exeunt all but BASTARD]

	A foot of honour better than I was;
	But many a many foot of land the worse.
	Well, now can I make any Joan a lady.
	'Good den, sir Richard!'--'God-a-mercy, fellow!'--
	And if his name be George, I'll call him Peter;
	For new-made honour doth forget men's names;
	'Tis too respective and too sociable
	For your conversion. Now your traveller,
	He and his toothpick at my worship's mess,
	And when my knightly stomach is sufficed,
	Why then I suck my teeth and catechise
	My picked man of countries: 'My dear sir,'
	Thus, leaning on mine elbow, I begin,
	'I shall beseech you'--that is question now;
	And then comes answer like an Absey book:
	'O sir,' says answer, 'at your best command;
	At your employment; at your service, sir;'
	'No, sir,' says question, 'I, sweet sir, at yours:'
	And so, ere answer knows what question would,
	Saving in dialogue of compliment,
	And talking of the Alps and Apennines,
	The Pyrenean and the river Po,
	It draws toward supper in conclusion so.
	But this is worshipful society
	And fits the mounting spirit like myself,
	For he is but a bastard to the time
	That doth not smack of observation;
	And so am I, whether I smack or no;
	And not alone in habit and device,
	Exterior form, outward accoutrement,
	But from the inward motion to deliver
	Sweet, sweet, sweet poison for the age's tooth:
	Which, though I will not practise to deceive,
	Yet, to avoid deceit, I mean to learn;
	For it shall strew the footsteps of my rising.
	But who comes in such haste in riding-robes?
	What woman-post is this? hath she no husband
	That will take pains to blow a horn before her?

	[Enter LADY FAULCONBRIDGE and GURNEY]

	O me! it is my mother. How now, good lady!
	What brings you here to court so hastily?

LADY FAULCONBRIDGE	Where is that slave, thy brother? where is he,
	That holds in chase mine honour up and down?

BASTARD	My brother Robert? old sir Robert's son?
	Colbrand the giant, that same mighty man?
	Is it sir Robert's son that you seek so?

LADY FAULCONBRIDGE	Sir Robert's son! Ay, thou unreverend boy,
	Sir Robert's son: why scorn'st thou at sir Robert?
	He is sir Robert's son, and so art thou.

BASTARD	James Gurney, wilt thou give us leave awhile?

GURNEY	Good leave, good Philip.

BASTARD	Philip! sparrow: James,
	There's toys abroad: anon I'll tell thee more.

	[Exit GURNEY]

	Madam, I was not old sir Robert's son:
	Sir Robert might have eat his part in me
	Upon Good-Friday and ne'er broke his fast:
	Sir Robert could do well: marry, to confess,
	Could he get me? Sir Robert could not do it:
	We know his handiwork: therefore, good mother,
	To whom am I beholding for these limbs?
	Sir Robert never holp to make this leg.

LADY FAULCONBRIDGE	Hast thou conspired with thy brother too,
	That for thine own gain shouldst defend mine honour?
	What means this scorn, thou most untoward knave?

BASTARD	Knight, knight, good mother, Basilisco-like.
	What! I am dubb'd! I have it on my shoulder.
	But, mother, I am not sir Robert's son;
	I have disclaim'd sir Robert and my land;
	Legitimation, name and all is gone:
	Then, good my mother, let me know my father;
	Some proper man, I hope: who was it, mother?

LADY FAULCONBRIDGE	Hast thou denied thyself a Faulconbridge?

BASTARD	As faithfully as I deny the devil.

LADY FAULCONBRIDGE	King Richard Coeur-de-lion was thy father:
	By long and vehement suit I was seduced
	To make room for him in my husband's bed:
	Heaven lay not my transgression to my charge!
	Thou art the issue of my dear offence,
	Which was so strongly urged past my defence.

BASTARD	Now, by this light, were I to get again,
	Madam, I would not wish a better father.
	Some sins do bear their privilege on earth,
	And so doth yours; your fault was not your folly:
	Needs must you lay your heart at his dispose,
	Subjected tribute to commanding love,
	Against whose fury and unmatched force
	The aweless lion could not wage the fight,
	Nor keep his princely heart from Richard's hand.
	He that perforce robs lions of their hearts
	May easily win a woman's. Ay, my mother,
	With all my heart I thank thee for my father!
	Who lives and dares but say thou didst not well
	When I was got, I'll send his soul to hell.
	Come, lady, I will show thee to my kin;
	And they shall say, when Richard me begot,
	If thou hadst said him nay, it had been sin:
	Who says it was, he lies; I say 'twas not.

	[Exeunt]




	KING JOHN


ACT II



SCENE I	France. Before Angiers.


	[Enter AUSTRIA and forces, drums, etc. on one side:
	on the other KING PHILIP and his power; LEWIS,
	ARTHUR, CONSTANCE and attendants]

LEWIS	Before Angiers well met, brave Austria.
	Arthur, that great forerunner of thy blood,
	Richard, that robb'd the lion of his heart
	And fought the holy wars in Palestine,
	By this brave duke came early to his grave:
	And for amends to his posterity,
	At our importance hither is he come,
	To spread his colours, boy, in thy behalf,
	And to rebuke the usurpation
	Of thy unnatural uncle, English John:
	Embrace him, love him, give him welcome hither.

ARTHUR	God shall forgive you Coeur-de-lion's death
	The rather that you give his offspring life,
	Shadowing their right under your wings of war:
	I give you welcome with a powerless hand,
	But with a heart full of unstained love:
	Welcome before the gates of Angiers, duke.

LEWIS	A noble boy! Who would not do thee right?

AUSTRIA	Upon thy cheek lay I this zealous kiss,
	As seal to this indenture of my love,
	That to my home I will no more return,
	Till Angiers and the right thou hast in France,
	Together with that pale, that white-faced shore,
	Whose foot spurns back the ocean's roaring tides
	And coops from other lands her islanders,
	Even till that England, hedged in with the main,
	That water-walled bulwark, still secure
	And confident from foreign purposes,
	Even till that utmost corner of the west
	Salute thee for her king: till then, fair boy,
	Will I not think of home, but follow arms.

CONSTANCE	O, take his mother's thanks, a widow's thanks,
	Till your strong hand shall help to give him strength
	To make a more requital to your love!

AUSTRIA	The peace of heaven is theirs that lift their swords
	In such a just and charitable war.

KING PHILIP	Well then, to work: our cannon shall be bent
	Against the brows of this resisting town.
	Call for our chiefest men of discipline,
	To cull the plots of best advantages:
	We'll lay before this town our royal bones,
	Wade to the market-place in Frenchmen's blood,
	But we will make it subject to this boy.

CONSTANCE	Stay for an answer to your embassy,
	Lest unadvised you stain your swords with blood:
	My Lord Chatillon may from England bring,
	That right in peace which here we urge in war,
	And then we shall repent each drop of blood
	That hot rash haste so indirectly shed.

	[Enter CHATILLON]

KING PHILIP	A wonder, lady! lo, upon thy wish,
	Our messenger Chatillon is arrived!
	What England says, say briefly, gentle lord;
	We coldly pause for thee; Chatillon, speak.

CHATILLON	Then turn your forces from this paltry siege
	And stir them up against a mightier task.
	England, impatient of your just demands,
	Hath put himself in arms: the adverse winds,
	Whose leisure I have stay'd, have given him time
	To land his legions all as soon as I;
	His marches are expedient to this town,
	His forces strong, his soldiers confident.
	With him along is come the mother-queen,
	An Ate, stirring him to blood and strife;
	With her her niece, the Lady Blanch of Spain;
	With them a bastard of the king's deceased,
	And all the unsettled humours of the land,
	Rash, inconsiderate, fiery voluntaries,
	With ladies' faces and fierce dragons' spleens,
	Have sold their fortunes at their native homes,
	Bearing their birthrights proudly on their backs,
	To make hazard of new fortunes here:
	In brief, a braver choice of dauntless spirits
	Than now the English bottoms have waft o'er
	Did nearer float upon the swelling tide,
	To do offence and scath in Christendom.

	[Drum beats]

	The interruption of their churlish drums
	Cuts off more circumstance: they are at hand,
	To parley or to fight; therefore prepare.

KING PHILIP	How much unlook'd for is this expedition!

AUSTRIA	By how much unexpected, by so much
	We must awake endavour for defence;
	For courage mounteth with occasion:
	Let them be welcome then: we are prepared.

	[Enter KING JOHN, QUEEN ELINOR, BLANCH, the BASTARD,
	Lords, and forces]

KING JOHN	Peace be to France, if France in peace permit
	Our just and lineal entrance to our own;
	If not, bleed France, and peace ascend to heaven,
	Whiles we, God's wrathful agent, do correct
	Their proud contempt that beats His peace to heaven.

KING PHILIP	Peace be to England, if that war return
	From France to England, there to live in peace.
	England we love; and for that England's sake
	With burden of our armour here we sweat.
	This toil of ours should be a work of thine;
	But thou from loving England art so far,
	That thou hast under-wrought his lawful king
	Cut off the sequence of posterity,
	Out-faced infant state and done a rape
	Upon the maiden virtue of the crown.
	Look here upon thy brother Geffrey's face;
	These eyes, these brows, were moulded out of his:
	This little abstract doth contain that large
	Which died in Geffrey, and the hand of time
	Shall draw this brief into as huge a volume.
	That Geffrey was thy elder brother born,
	And this his son; England was Geffrey's right
	And this is Geffrey's: in the name of God
	How comes it then that thou art call'd a king,
	When living blood doth in these temples beat,
	Which owe the crown that thou o'ermasterest?

KING JOHN	From whom hast thou this great commission, France,
	To draw my answer from thy articles?

KING PHILIP	From that supernal judge, that stirs good thoughts
	In any breast of strong authority,
	To look into the blots and stains of right:
	That judge hath made me guardian to this boy:
	Under whose warrant I impeach thy wrong
	And by whose help I mean to chastise it.

KING JOHN	Alack, thou dost usurp authority.

KING PHILIP	Excuse; it is to beat usurping down.

QUEEN ELINOR	Who is it thou dost call usurper, France?

CONSTANCE	Let me make answer; thy usurping son.

QUEEN ELINOR	Out, insolent! thy bastard shall be king,
	That thou mayst be a queen, and cheque the world!

CONSTANCE	My bed was ever to thy son as true
	As thine was to thy husband; and this boy
	Liker in feature to his father Geffrey
	Than thou and John in manners; being as like
	As rain to water, or devil to his dam.
	My boy a bastard! By my soul, I think
	His father never was so true begot:
	It cannot be, an if thou wert his mother.

QUEEN ELINOR	There's a good mother, boy, that blots thy father.

CONSTANCE	There's a good grandam, boy, that would blot thee.

AUSTRIA	Peace!

BASTARD	     Hear the crier.

AUSTRIA	What the devil art thou?

BASTARD	One that will play the devil, sir, with you,
	An a' may catch your hide and you alone:
	You are the hare of whom the proverb goes,
	Whose valour plucks dead lions by the beard;
	I'll smoke your skin-coat, an I catch you right;
	Sirrah, look to't; i' faith, I will, i' faith.

BLANCH	O, well did he become that lion's robe
	That did disrobe the lion of that robe!

BASTARD	It lies as sightly on the back of him
	As great Alcides' shows upon an ass:
	But, ass, I'll take that burthen from your back,
	Or lay on that shall make your shoulders crack.

AUSTRIA	What craker is this same that deafs our ears
	With this abundance of superfluous breath?

KING PHILIP	Lewis, determine what we shall do straight.

LEWIS	Women and fools, break off your conference.
	King John, this is the very sum of all;
	England and Ireland, Anjou, Touraine, Maine,
	In right of Arthur do I claim of thee:
	Wilt thou resign them and lay down thy arms?

KING JOHN	My life as soon: I do defy thee, France.
	Arthur of Bretagne, yield thee to my hand;
	And out of my dear love I'll give thee more
	Than e'er the coward hand of France can win:
	Submit thee, boy.

QUEEN ELINOR	                  Come to thy grandam, child.

CONSTANCE	Do, child, go to it grandam, child:
	Give grandam kingdom, and it grandam will
	Give it a plum, a cherry, and a fig:
	There's a good grandam.

ARTHUR	Good my mother, peace!
	I would that I were low laid in my grave:
	I am not worth this coil that's made for me.

QUEEN ELINOR	His mother shames him so, poor boy, he weeps.

CONSTANCE	Now shame upon you, whether she does or no!
	His grandam's wrongs, and not his mother's shames,
	Draws those heaven-moving pearls from his poor eyes,
	Which heaven shall take in nature of a fee;
	Ay, with these crystal beads heaven shall be bribed
	To do him justice and revenge on you.

QUEEN ELINOR	Thou monstrous slanderer of heaven and earth!

CONSTANCE	Thou monstrous injurer of heaven and earth!
	Call not me slanderer; thou and thine usurp
	The dominations, royalties and rights
	Of this oppressed boy: this is thy eld'st son's son,
	Infortunate in nothing but in thee:
	Thy sins are visited in this poor child;
	The canon of the law is laid on him,
	Being but the second generation
	Removed from thy sin-conceiving womb.

KING JOHN	Bedlam, have done.

CONSTANCE	                  I have but this to say,
	That he is not only plagued for her sin,
	But God hath made her sin and her the plague
	On this removed issue, plague for her
	And with her plague; her sin his injury,
	Her injury the beadle to her sin,
	All punish'd in the person of this child,
	And all for her; a plague upon her!

QUEEN ELINOR	Thou unadvised scold, I can produce
	A will that bars the title of thy son.

CONSTANCE	Ay, who doubts that? a will! a wicked will:
	A woman's will; a canker'd grandam's will!

KING PHILIP	Peace, lady! pause, or be more temperate:
	It ill beseems this presence to cry aim
	To these ill-tuned repetitions.
	Some trumpet summon hither to the walls
	These men of Angiers: let us hear them speak
	Whose title they admit, Arthur's or John's.

	[Trumpet sounds. Enter certain Citizens upon the walls]

First Citizen	Who is it that hath warn'd us to the walls?

KING PHILIP	'Tis France, for England.

KING JOHN	England, for itself.
	You men of Angiers, and my loving subjects--

KING PHILIP	You loving men of Angiers, Arthur's subjects,
	Our trumpet call'd you to this gentle parle--

KING JOHN	For our advantage; therefore hear us first.
	These flags of France, that are advanced here
	Before the eye and prospect of your town,
	Have hither march'd to your endamagement:
	The cannons have their bowels full of wrath,
	And ready mounted are they to spit forth
	Their iron indignation 'gainst your walls:
	All preparation for a bloody siege
	All merciless proceeding by these French
	Confronts your city's eyes, your winking gates;
	And but for our approach those sleeping stones,
	That as a waist doth girdle you about,
	By the compulsion of their ordinance
	By this time from their fixed beds of lime
	Had been dishabited, and wide havoc made
	For bloody power to rush upon your peace.
	But on the sight of us your lawful king,
	Who painfully with much expedient march
	Have brought a countercheque before your gates,
	To save unscratch'd your city's threatened cheeks,
	Behold, the French amazed vouchsafe a parle;
	And now, instead of bullets wrapp'd in fire,
	To make a shaking fever in your walls,
	They shoot but calm words folded up in smoke,
	To make a faithless error in your ears:
	Which trust accordingly, kind citizens,
	And let us in, your king, whose labour'd spirits,
	Forwearied in this action of swift speed,
	Crave harbourage within your city walls.

KING PHILIP	When I have said, make answer to us both.
	Lo, in this right hand, whose protection
	Is most divinely vow'd upon the right
	Of him it holds, stands young Plantagenet,
	Son to the elder brother of this man,
	And king o'er him and all that he enjoys:
	For this down-trodden equity, we tread
	In warlike march these greens before your town,
	Being no further enemy to you
	Than the constraint of hospitable zeal
	In the relief of this oppressed child
	Religiously provokes. Be pleased then
	To pay that duty which you truly owe
	To that owes it, namely this young prince:
	And then our arms, like to a muzzled bear,
	Save in aspect, hath all offence seal'd up;
	Our cannons' malice vainly shall be spent
	Against the invulnerable clouds of heaven;
	And with a blessed and unvex'd retire,
	With unhack'd swords and helmets all unbruised,
	We will bear home that lusty blood again
	Which here we came to spout against your town,
	And leave your children, wives and you in peace.
	But if you fondly pass our proffer'd offer,
	'Tis not the roundure of your old-faced walls
	Can hide you from our messengers of war,
	Though all these English and their discipline
	Were harbour'd in their rude circumference.
	Then tell us, shall your city call us lord,
	In that behalf which we have challenged it?
	Or shall we give the signal to our rage
	And stalk in blood to our possession?

First Citizen	In brief, we are the king of England's subjects:
	For him, and in his right, we hold this town.

KING JOHN	Acknowledge then the king, and let me in.

First Citizen	That can we not; but he that proves the king,
	To him will we prove loyal: till that time
	Have we ramm'd up our gates against the world.

KING JOHN	Doth not the crown of England prove the king?
	And if not that, I bring you witnesses,
	Twice fifteen thousand hearts of England's breed,--

BASTARD	Bastards, and else.

KING JOHN	To verify our title with their lives.

KING PHILIP	As many and as well-born bloods as those,--

BASTARD	Some bastards too.

KING PHILIP	Stand in his face to contradict his claim.

First Citizen	Till you compound whose right is worthiest,
	We for the worthiest hold the right from both.

KING JOHN	Then God forgive the sin of all those souls
	That to their everlasting residence,
	Before the dew of evening fall, shall fleet,
	In dreadful trial of our kingdom's king!

KING PHILIP	Amen, amen! Mount, chevaliers! to arms!

BASTARD	Saint George, that swinged the dragon, and e'er since
	Sits on his horseback at mine hostess' door,
	Teach us some fence!

	[To AUSTRIA]

		Sirrah, were I at home,
	At your den, sirrah, with your lioness
	I would set an ox-head to your lion's hide,
	And make a monster of you.

AUSTRIA	Peace! no more.

BASTARD	O tremble, for you hear the lion roar.

KING JOHN	Up higher to the plain; where we'll set forth
	In best appointment all our regiments.

BASTARD	Speed then, to take advantage of the field.

KING PHILIP	It shall be so; and at the other hill
	Command the rest to stand. God and our right!

	[Exeunt]

	[Here after excursions, enter the Herald of France,
	with trumpets, to the gates]

French Herald	You men of Angiers, open wide your gates,
	And let young Arthur, Duke of Bretagne, in,
	Who by the hand of France this day hath made
	Much work for tears in many an English mother,
	Whose sons lie scattered on the bleeding ground;
	Many a widow's husband grovelling lies,
	Coldly embracing the discolour'd earth;
	And victory, with little loss, doth play
	Upon the dancing banners of the French,
	Who are at hand, triumphantly display'd,
	To enter conquerors and to proclaim
	Arthur of Bretagne England's king and yours.

	[Enter English Herald, with trumpet]

English Herald	Rejoice, you men of Angiers, ring your bells:
	King John, your king and England's doth approach,
	Commander of this hot malicious day:
	Their armours, that march'd hence so silver-bright,
	Hither return all gilt with Frenchmen's blood;
	There stuck no plume in any English crest
	That is removed by a staff of France;
	Our colours do return in those same hands
	That did display them when we first march'd forth;
	And, like a troop of jolly huntsmen, come
	Our lusty English, all with purpled hands,
	Dyed in the dying slaughter of their foes:
	Open your gates and gives the victors way.

First Citizen	Heralds, from off our towers we might behold,
	From first to last, the onset and retire
	Of both your armies; whose equality
	By our best eyes cannot be censured:
	Blood hath bought blood and blows have answered blows;
	Strength match'd with strength, and power confronted power:
	Both are alike; and both alike we like.
	One must prove greatest: while they weigh so even,
	We hold our town for neither, yet for both.

	[Re-enter KING JOHN and KING PHILIP, with their
	powers, severally]

KING JOHN	France, hast thou yet more blood to cast away?
	Say, shall the current of our right run on?
	Whose passage, vex'd with thy impediment,
	Shall leave his native channel and o'erswell
	With course disturb'd even thy confining shores,
	Unless thou let his silver water keep
	A peaceful progress to the ocean.

KING PHILIP	England, thou hast not saved one drop of blood,
	In this hot trial, more than we of France;
	Rather, lost more. And by this hand I swear,
	That sways the earth this climate overlooks,
	Before we will lay down our just-borne arms,
	We'll put thee down, 'gainst whom these arms we bear,
	Or add a royal number to the dead,
	Gracing the scroll that tells of this war's loss
	With slaughter coupled to the name of kings.

BASTARD	Ha, majesty! how high thy glory towers,
	When the rich blood of kings is set on fire!
	O, now doth Death line his dead chaps with steel;
	The swords of soldiers are his teeth, his fangs;
	And now he feasts, mousing the flesh of men,
	In undetermined differences of kings.
	Why stand these royal fronts amazed thus?
	Cry, 'havoc!' kings; back to the stained field,
	You equal potents, fiery kindled spirits!
	Then let confusion of one part confirm
	The other's peace: till then, blows, blood and death!

KING JOHN	Whose party do the townsmen yet admit?

KING PHILIP	Speak, citizens, for England; who's your king?

First Citizen	The king of England; when we know the king.

KING PHILIP	Know him in us, that here hold up his right.

KING JOHN	In us, that are our own great deputy
	And bear possession of our person here,
	Lord of our presence, Angiers, and of you.

First Citizen	A greater power then we denies all this;
	And till it be undoubted, we do lock
	Our former scruple in our strong-barr'd gates;
	King'd of our fears, until our fears, resolved,
	Be by some certain king purged and deposed.

BASTARD	By heaven, these scroyles of Angiers flout you, kings,
	And stand securely on their battlements,
	As in a theatre, whence they gape and point
	At your industrious scenes and acts of death.
	Your royal presences be ruled by me:
	Do like the mutines of Jerusalem,
	Be friends awhile and both conjointly bend
	Your sharpest deeds of malice on this town:
	By east and west let France and England mount
	Their battering cannon charged to the mouths,
	Till their soul-fearing clamours have brawl'd down
	The flinty ribs of this contemptuous city:
	I'ld play incessantly upon these jades,
	Even till unfenced desolation
	Leave them as naked as the vulgar air.
	That done, dissever your united strengths,
	And part your mingled colours once again;
	Turn face to face and bloody point to point;
	Then, in a moment, Fortune shall cull forth
	Out of one side her happy minion,
	To whom in favour she shall give the day,
	And kiss him with a glorious victory.
	How like you this wild counsel, mighty states?
	Smacks it not something of the policy?

KING JOHN	Now, by the sky that hangs above our heads,
	I like it well. France, shall we knit our powers
	And lay this Angiers even to the ground;
	Then after fight who shall be king of it?

BASTARD	An if thou hast the mettle of a king,
	Being wronged as we are by this peevish town,
	Turn thou the mouth of thy artillery,
	As we will ours, against these saucy walls;
	And when that we have dash'd them to the ground,
	Why then defy each other and pell-mell
	Make work upon ourselves, for heaven or hell.

KING PHILIP	Let it be so. Say, where will you assault?

KING JOHN	We from the west will send destruction
	Into this city's bosom.

AUSTRIA	I from the north.

KING PHILIP	                  Our thunder from the south
	Shall rain their drift of bullets on this town.

BASTARD	O prudent discipline! From north to south:
	Austria and France shoot in each other's mouth:
	I'll stir them to it. Come, away, away!

First Citizen	Hear us, great kings: vouchsafe awhile to stay,
	And I shall show you peace and fair-faced league;
	Win you this city without stroke or wound;
	Rescue those breathing lives to die in beds,
	That here come sacrifices for the field:
	Persever not, but hear me, mighty kings.

KING JOHN	Speak on with favour; we are bent to hear.

First Citizen	That daughter there of Spain, the Lady Blanch,
	Is niece to England: look upon the years
	Of Lewis the Dauphin and that lovely maid:
	If lusty love should go in quest of beauty,
	Where should he find it fairer than in Blanch?
	If zealous love should go in search of virtue,
	Where should he find it purer than in Blanch?
	If love ambitious sought a match of birth,
	Whose veins bound richer blood than Lady Blanch?
	Such as she is, in beauty, virtue, birth,
	Is the young Dauphin every way complete:
	If not complete of, say he is not she;
	And she again wants nothing, to name want,
	If want it be not that she is not he:
	He is the half part of a blessed man,
	Left to be finished by such as she;
	And she a fair divided excellence,
	Whose fulness of perfection lies in him.
	O, two such silver currents, when they join,
	Do glorify the banks that bound them in;
	And two such shores to two such streams made one,
	Two such controlling bounds shall you be, kings,
	To these two princes, if you marry them.
	This union shall do more than battery can
	To our fast-closed gates; for at this match,
	With swifter spleen than powder can enforce,
	The mouth of passage shall we fling wide ope,
	And give you entrance: but without this match,
	The sea enraged is not half so deaf,
	Lions more confident, mountains and rocks
	More free from motion, no, not Death himself
	In moral fury half so peremptory,
	As we to keep this city.

BASTARD	Here's a stay
	That shakes the rotten carcass of old Death
	Out of his rags! Here's a large mouth, indeed,
	That spits forth death and mountains, rocks and seas,
	Talks as familiarly of roaring lions
	As maids of thirteen do of puppy-dogs!
	What cannoneer begot this lusty blood?
	He speaks plain cannon fire, and smoke and bounce;
	He gives the bastinado with his tongue:
	Our ears are cudgell'd; not a word of his
	But buffets better than a fist of France:
	Zounds! I was never so bethump'd with words
	Since I first call'd my brother's father dad.

QUEEN ELINOR	Son, list to this conjunction, make this match;
	Give with our niece a dowry large enough:
	For by this knot thou shalt so surely tie
	Thy now unsured assurance to the crown,
	That yon green boy shall have no sun to ripe
	The bloom that promiseth a mighty fruit.
	I see a yielding in the looks of France;
	Mark, how they whisper: urge them while their souls
	Are capable of this ambition,
	Lest zeal, now melted by the windy breath
	Of soft petitions, pity and remorse,
	Cool and congeal again to what it was.

First Citizen	Why answer not the double majesties
	This friendly treaty of our threaten'd town?

KING PHILIP	Speak England first, that hath been forward first
	To speak unto this city: what say you?

KING JOHN	If that the Dauphin there, thy princely son,
	Can in this book of beauty read 'I love,'
	Her dowry shall weigh equal with a queen:
	For Anjou and fair Touraine, Maine, Poictiers,
	And all that we upon this side the sea,
	Except this city now by us besieged,
	Find liable to our crown and dignity,
	Shall gild her bridal bed and make her rich
	In titles, honours and promotions,
	As she in beauty, education, blood,
	Holds hand with any princess of the world.

KING PHILIP	What say'st thou, boy? look in the lady's face.

LEWIS	I do, my lord; and in her eye I find
	A wonder, or a wondrous miracle,
	The shadow of myself form'd in her eye:
	Which being but the shadow of your son,
	Becomes a sun and makes your son a shadow:
	I do protest I never loved myself
	Till now infixed I beheld myself
	Drawn in the flattering table of her eye.

	[Whispers with BLANCH]

BASTARD	Drawn in the flattering table of her eye!
	Hang'd in the frowning wrinkle of her brow!
	And quarter'd in her heart! he doth espy
	Himself love's traitor: this is pity now,
	That hang'd and drawn and quartered, there should be
	In such a love so vile a lout as he.

BLANCH	My uncle's will in this respect is mine:
	If he see aught in you that makes him like,
	That any thing he sees, which moves his liking,
	I can with ease translate it to my will;
	Or if you will, to speak more properly,
	I will enforce it easily to my love.
	Further I will not flatter you, my lord,
	That all I see in you is worthy love,
	Than this; that nothing do I see in you,
	Though churlish thoughts themselves should be your judge,
	That I can find should merit any hate.

KING JOHN	What say these young ones? What say you my niece?

BLANCH	That she is bound in honour still to do
	What you in wisdom still vouchsafe to say.

KING JOHN	Speak then, prince Dauphin; can you love this lady?

LEWIS	Nay, ask me if I can refrain from love;
	For I do love her most unfeignedly.

KING JOHN	Then do I give Volquessen, Touraine, Maine,
	Poictiers and Anjou, these five provinces,
	With her to thee; and this addition more,
	Full thirty thousand marks of English coin.
	Philip of France, if thou be pleased withal,
	Command thy son and daughter to join hands.

KING PHILIP	It likes us well; young princes, close your hands.

AUSTRIA	And your lips too; for I am well assured
	That I did so when I was first assured.

KING PHILIP	Now, citizens of Angiers, ope your gates,
	Let in that amity which you have made;
	For at Saint Mary's chapel presently
	The rites of marriage shall be solemnized.
	Is not the Lady Constance in this troop?
	I know she is not, for this match made up
	Her presence would have interrupted much:
	Where is she and her son? tell me, who knows.

LEWIS	She is sad and passionate at your highness' tent.

KING PHILIP	And, by my faith, this league that we have made
	Will give her sadness very little cure.
	Brother of England, how may we content
	This widow lady? In her right we came;
	Which we, God knows, have turn'd another way,
	To our own vantage.

KING JOHN	We will heal up all;
	For we'll create young Arthur Duke of Bretagne
	And Earl of Richmond; and this rich fair town
	We make him lord of. Call the Lady Constance;
	Some speedy messenger bid her repair
	To our solemnity: I trust we shall,
	If not fill up the measure of her will,
	Yet in some measure satisfy her so
	That we shall stop her exclamation.
	Go we, as well as haste will suffer us,
	To this unlook'd for, unprepared pomp.

	[Exeunt all but the BASTARD]

BASTARD	Mad world! mad kings! mad composition!
	John, to stop Arthur's title in the whole,
	Hath willingly departed with a part,
	And France, whose armour conscience buckled on,
	Whom zeal and charity brought to the field
	As God's own soldier, rounded in the ear
	With that same purpose-changer, that sly devil,
	That broker, that still breaks the pate of faith,
	That daily break-vow, he that wins of all,
	Of kings, of beggars, old men, young men, maids,
	Who, having no external thing to lose
	But the word 'maid,' cheats the poor maid of that,
	That smooth-faced gentleman, tickling Commodity,
	Commodity, the bias of the world,
	The world, who of itself is peised well,
	Made to run even upon even ground,
	Till this advantage, this vile-drawing bias,
	This sway of motion, this Commodity,
	Makes it take head from all indifferency,
	From all direction, purpose, course, intent:
	And this same bias, this Commodity,
	This bawd, this broker, this all-changing word,
	Clapp'd on the outward eye of fickle France,
	Hath drawn him from his own determined aid,
	From a resolved and honourable war,
	To a most base and vile-concluded peace.
	And why rail I on this Commodity?
	But for because he hath not woo'd me yet:
	Not that I have the power to clutch my hand,
	When his fair angels would salute my palm;
	But for my hand, as unattempted yet,
	Like a poor beggar, raileth on the rich.
	Well, whiles I am a beggar, I will rail
	And say there is no sin but to be rich;
	And being rich, my virtue then shall be
	To say there is no vice but beggary.
	Since kings break faith upon commodity,
	Gain, be my lord, for I will worship thee.

	[Exit]




	KING JOHN


ACT III



SCENE I	The French King's pavilion.


	[Enter CONSTANCE, ARTHUR, and SALISBURY]

CONSTANCE	Gone to be married! gone to swear a peace!
	False blood to false blood join'd! gone to be friends!
	Shall Lewis have Blanch, and Blanch those provinces?
	It is not so; thou hast misspoke, misheard:
	Be well advised, tell o'er thy tale again:
	It cannot be; thou dost but say 'tis so:
	I trust I may not trust thee; for thy word
	Is but the vain breath of a common man:
	Believe me, I do not believe thee, man;
	I have a king's oath to the contrary.
	Thou shalt be punish'd for thus frighting me,
	For I am sick and capable of fears,
	Oppress'd with wrongs and therefore full of fears,
	A widow, husbandless, subject to fears,
	A woman, naturally born to fears;
	And though thou now confess thou didst but jest,
	With my vex'd spirits I cannot take a truce,
	But they will quake and tremble all this day.
	What dost thou mean by shaking of thy head?
	Why dost thou look so sadly on my son?
	What means that hand upon that breast of thine?
	Why holds thine eye that lamentable rheum,
	Like a proud river peering o'er his bounds?
	Be these sad signs confirmers of thy words?
	Then speak again; not all thy former tale,
	But this one word, whether thy tale be true.

SALISBURY	As true as I believe you think them false
	That give you cause to prove my saying true.

CONSTANCE	O, if thou teach me to believe this sorrow,
	Teach thou this sorrow how to make me die,
	And let belief and life encounter so
	As doth the fury of two desperate men
	Which in the very meeting fall and die.
	Lewis marry Blanch! O boy, then where art thou?
	France friend with England, what becomes of me?
	Fellow, be gone: I cannot brook thy sight:
	This news hath made thee a most ugly man.

SALISBURY	What other harm have I, good lady, done,
	But spoke the harm that is by others done?

CONSTANCE	Which harm within itself so heinous is
	As it makes harmful all that speak of it.

ARTHUR	I do beseech you, madam, be content.

CONSTANCE	If thou, that bid'st me be content, wert grim,
	Ugly and slanderous to thy mother's womb,
	Full of unpleasing blots and sightless stains,
	Lame, foolish, crooked, swart, prodigious,
	Patch'd with foul moles and eye-offending marks,
	I would not care, I then would be content,
	For then I should not love thee, no, nor thou
	Become thy great birth nor deserve a crown.
	But thou art fair, and at thy birth, dear boy,
	Nature and Fortune join'd to make thee great:
	Of Nature's gifts thou mayst with lilies boast,
	And with the half-blown rose. But Fortune, O,
	She is corrupted, changed and won from thee;
	She adulterates hourly with thine uncle John,
	And with her golden hand hath pluck'd on France
	To tread down fair respect of sovereignty,
	And made his majesty the bawd to theirs.
	France is a bawd to Fortune and King John,
	That strumpet Fortune, that usurping John!
	Tell me, thou fellow, is not France forsworn?
	Envenom him with words, or get thee gone
	And leave those woes alone which I alone
	Am bound to under-bear.

SALISBURY	Pardon me, madam,
	I may not go without you to the kings.

CONSTANCE	Thou mayst, thou shalt; I will not go with thee:
	I will instruct my sorrows to be proud;
	For grief is proud and makes his owner stoop.
	To me and to the state of my great grief
	Let kings assemble; for my grief's so great
	That no supporter but the huge firm earth
	Can hold it up: here I and sorrows sit;
	Here is my throne, bid kings come bow to it.

	[Seats herself on the ground]

	[Enter KING JOHN, KING PHILLIP, LEWIS, BLANCH,
	QUEEN ELINOR, the BASTARD, AUSTRIA, and Attendants]

KING PHILIP	'Tis true, fair daughter; and this blessed day
	Ever in France shall be kept festival:
	To solemnize this day the glorious sun
	Stays in his course and plays the alchemist,
	Turning with splendor of his precious eye
	The meagre cloddy earth to glittering gold:
	The yearly course that brings this day about
	Shall never see it but a holiday.

CONSTANCE	A wicked day, and not a holy day!

	[Rising]

	What hath this day deserved? what hath it done,
	That it in golden letters should be set
	Among the high tides in the calendar?
	Nay, rather turn this day out of the week,
	This day of shame, oppression, perjury.
	Or, if it must stand still, let wives with child
	Pray that their burthens may not fall this day,
	Lest that their hopes prodigiously be cross'd:
	But on this day let seamen fear no wreck;
	No bargains break that are not this day made:
	This day, all things begun come to ill end,
	Yea, faith itself to hollow falsehood change!

KING PHILIP	By heaven, lady, you shall have no cause
	To curse the fair proceedings of this day:
	Have I not pawn'd to you my majesty?

CONSTANCE	You have beguiled me with a counterfeit
	Resembling majesty, which, being touch'd and tried,
	Proves valueless: you are forsworn, forsworn;
	You came in arms to spill mine enemies' blood,
	But now in arms you strengthen it with yours:
	The grappling vigour and rough frown of war
	Is cold in amity and painted peace,
	And our oppression hath made up this league.
	Arm, arm, you heavens, against these perjured kings!
	A widow cries; be husband to me, heavens!
	Let not the hours of this ungodly day
	Wear out the day in peace; but, ere sunset,
	Set armed discord 'twixt these perjured kings!
	Hear me, O, hear me!

AUSTRIA	Lady Constance, peace!

CONSTANCE	War! war! no peace! peace is to me a war
	O Lymoges! O Austria! thou dost shame
	That bloody spoil: thou slave, thou wretch, thou coward!
	Thou little valiant, great in villany!
	Thou ever strong upon the stronger side!
	Thou Fortune's champion that dost never fight
	But when her humorous ladyship is by
	To teach thee safety! thou art perjured too,
	And soothest up greatness. What a fool art thou,
	A ramping fool, to brag and stamp and swear
	Upon my party! Thou cold-blooded slave,
	Hast thou not spoke like thunder on my side,
	Been sworn my soldier, bidding me depend
	Upon thy stars, thy fortune and thy strength,
	And dost thou now fall over to my fores?
	Thou wear a lion's hide! doff it for shame,
	And hang a calf's-skin on those recreant limbs.

AUSTRIA	O, that a man should speak those words to me!

BASTARD	And hang a calf's-skin on those recreant limbs.

AUSTRIA	Thou darest not say so, villain, for thy life.

BASTARD	And hang a calf's-skin on those recreant limbs.

KING JOHN	We like not this; thou dost forget thyself.

	[Enter CARDINAL PANDULPH]

KING PHILIP	Here comes the holy legate of the pope.

CARDINAL PANDULPH	Hail, you anointed deputies of heaven!
	To thee, King John, my holy errand is.
	I Pandulph, of fair Milan cardinal,
	And from Pope Innocent the legate here,
	Do in his name religiously demand
	Why thou against the church, our holy mother,
	So wilfully dost spurn; and force perforce
	Keep Stephen Langton, chosen archbishop
	Of Canterbury, from that holy see?
	This, in our foresaid holy father's name,
	Pope Innocent, I do demand of thee.

KING JOHN	What earthy name to interrogatories
	Can task the free breath of a sacred king?
	Thou canst not, cardinal, devise a name
	So slight, unworthy and ridiculous,
	To charge me to an answer, as the pope.
	Tell him this tale; and from the mouth of England
	Add thus much more, that no Italian priest
	Shall tithe or toll in our dominions;
	But as we, under heaven, are supreme head,
	So under Him that great supremacy,
	Where we do reign, we will alone uphold,
	Without the assistance of a mortal hand:
	So tell the pope, all reverence set apart
	To him and his usurp'd authority.

KING PHILIP	Brother of England, you blaspheme in this.

KING JOHN	Though you and all the kings of Christendom
	Are led so grossly by this meddling priest,
	Dreading the curse that money may buy out;
	And by the merit of vile gold, dross, dust,
	Purchase corrupted pardon of a man,
	Who in that sale sells pardon from himself,
	Though you and all the rest so grossly led
	This juggling witchcraft with revenue cherish,
	Yet I alone, alone do me oppose
	Against the pope and count his friends my foes.

CARDINAL PANDULPH	Then, by the lawful power that I have,
	Thou shalt stand cursed and excommunicate.
	And blessed shall he be that doth revolt
	From his allegiance to an heretic;
	And meritorious shall that hand be call'd,
	Canonized and worshipped as a saint,
	That takes away by any secret course
	Thy hateful life.

CONSTANCE	                  O, lawful let it be
	That I have room with Rome to curse awhile!
	Good father cardinal, cry thou amen
	To my keen curses; for without my wrong
	There is no tongue hath power to curse him right.

CARDINAL PANDULPH	There's law and warrant, lady, for my curse.

CONSTANCE	And for mine too: when law can do no right,
	Let it be lawful that law bar no wrong:
	Law cannot give my child his kingdom here,
	For he that holds his kingdom holds the law;
	Therefore, since law itself is perfect wrong,
	How can the law forbid my tongue to curse?

CARDINAL PANDULPH	Philip of France, on peril of a curse,
	Let go the hand of that arch-heretic;
	And raise the power of France upon his head,
	Unless he do submit himself to Rome.

QUEEN ELINOR	Look'st thou pale, France? do not let go thy hand.

CONSTANCE	Look to that, devil; lest that France repent,
	And by disjoining hands, hell lose a soul.

AUSTRIA	King Philip, listen to the cardinal.

BASTARD	And hang a calf's-skin on his recreant limbs.

AUSTRIA	Well, ruffian, I must pocket up these wrongs, Because--

BASTARD	        Your breeches best may carry them.

KING JOHN	Philip, what say'st thou to the cardinal?

CONSTANCE	What should he say, but as the cardinal?

LEWIS	Bethink you, father; for the difference
	Is purchase of a heavy curse from Rome,
	Or the light loss of England for a friend:
	Forego the easier.

BLANCH	                  That's the curse of Rome.

CONSTANCE	O Lewis, stand fast! the devil tempts thee here
	In likeness of a new untrimmed bride.

BLANCH	The Lady Constance speaks not from her faith,
	But from her need.

CONSTANCE	                  O, if thou grant my need,
	Which only lives but by the death of faith,
	That need must needs infer this principle,
	That faith would live again by death of need.
	O then, tread down my need, and faith mounts up;
	Keep my need up, and faith is trodden down!

KING JOHN	The king is moved, and answers not to this.

CONSTANCE	O, be removed from him, and answer well!

AUSTRIA	Do so, King Philip; hang no more in doubt.

BASTARD	Hang nothing but a calf's-skin, most sweet lout.

KING PHILIP	I am perplex'd, and know not what to say.

CARDINAL PANDULPH	What canst thou say but will perplex thee more,
	If thou stand excommunicate and cursed?

KING PHILIP	Good reverend father, make my person yours,
	And tell me how you would bestow yourself.
	This royal hand and mine are newly knit,
	And the conjunction of our inward souls
	Married in league, coupled and linked together
	With all religious strength of sacred vows;
	The latest breath that gave the sound of words
	Was deep-sworn faith, peace, amity, true love
	Between our kingdoms and our royal selves,
	And even before this truce, but new before,
	No longer than we well could wash our hands
	To clap this royal bargain up of peace,
	Heaven knows, they were besmear'd and over-stain'd
	With slaughter's pencil, where revenge did paint
	The fearful difference of incensed kings:
	And shall these hands, so lately purged of blood,
	So newly join'd in love, so strong in both,
	Unyoke this seizure and this kind regreet?
	Play fast and loose with faith? so jest with heaven,
	Make such unconstant children of ourselves,
	As now again to snatch our palm from palm,
	Unswear faith sworn, and on the marriage-bed
	Of smiling peace to march a bloody host,
	And make a riot on the gentle brow
	Of true sincerity? O, holy sir,
	My reverend father, let it not be so!
	Out of your grace, devise, ordain, impose
	Some gentle order; and then we shall be blest
	To do your pleasure and continue friends.

CARDINAL PANDULPH	All form is formless, order orderless,
	Save what is opposite to England's love.
	Therefore to arms! be champion of our church,
	Or let the church, our mother, breathe her curse,
	A mother's curse, on her revolting son.
	France, thou mayst hold a serpent by the tongue,
	A chafed lion by the mortal paw,
	A fasting tiger safer by the tooth,
	Than keep in peace that hand which thou dost hold.

KING PHILIP	I may disjoin my hand, but not my faith.

CARDINAL PANDULPH	So makest thou faith an enemy to faith;
	And like a civil war set'st oath to oath,
	Thy tongue against thy tongue. O, let thy vow
	First made to heaven, first be to heaven perform'd,
	That is, to be the champion of our church!
	What since thou sworest is sworn against thyself
	And may not be performed by thyself,
	For that which thou hast sworn to do amiss
	Is not amiss when it is truly done,
	And being not done, where doing tends to ill,
	The truth is then most done not doing it:
	The better act of purposes mistook
	Is to mistake again; though indirect,
	Yet indirection thereby grows direct,
	And falsehood falsehood cures, as fire cools fire
	Within the scorched veins of one new-burn'd.
	It is religion that doth make vows kept;
	But thou hast sworn against religion,
	By what thou swear'st against the thing thou swear'st,
	And makest an oath the surety for thy truth
	Against an oath: the truth thou art unsure
	To swear, swears only not to be forsworn;
	Else what a mockery should it be to swear!
	But thou dost swear only to be forsworn;
	And most forsworn, to keep what thou dost swear.
	Therefore thy later vows against thy first
	Is in thyself rebellion to thyself;
	And better conquest never canst thou make
	Than arm thy constant and thy nobler parts
	Against these giddy loose suggestions:
	Upon which better part our prayers come in,
	If thou vouchsafe them. But if not, then know
	The peril of our curses light on thee
	So heavy as thou shalt not shake them off,
	But in despair die under their black weight.

AUSTRIA	Rebellion, flat rebellion!

BASTARD	Will't not be?
	Will not a calfs-skin stop that mouth of thine?

LEWIS	Father, to arms!

BLANCH	                  Upon thy wedding-day?
	Against the blood that thou hast married?
	What, shall our feast be kept with slaughter'd men?
	Shall braying trumpets and loud churlish drums,
	Clamours of hell, be measures to our pomp?
	O husband, hear me! ay, alack, how new
	Is husband in my mouth! even for that name,
	Which till this time my tongue did ne'er pronounce,
	Upon my knee I beg, go not to arms
	Against mine uncle.

CONSTANCE	O, upon my knee,
	Made hard with kneeling, I do pray to thee,
	Thou virtuous Dauphin, alter not the doom
	Forethought by heaven!

BLANCH	Now shall I see thy love: what motive may
	Be stronger with thee than the name of wife?

CONSTANCE	That which upholdeth him that thee upholds,
	His honour: O, thine honour, Lewis, thine honour!

LEWIS	I muse your majesty doth seem so cold,
	When such profound respects do pull you on.

CARDINAL PANDULPH	I will denounce a curse upon his head.

KING PHILIP	Thou shalt not need. England, I will fall from thee.

CONSTANCE	O fair return of banish'd majesty!

QUEEN ELINOR	O foul revolt of French inconstancy!

KING JOHN	France, thou shalt rue this hour within this hour.

BASTARD	Old Time the clock-setter, that bald sexton Time,
	Is it as he will? well then, France shall rue.

BLANCH	The sun's o'ercast with blood: fair day, adieu!
	Which is the side that I must go withal?
	I am with both: each army hath a hand;
	And in their rage, I having hold of both,
	They swirl asunder and dismember me.
	Husband, I cannot pray that thou mayst win;
	Uncle, I needs must pray that thou mayst lose;
	Father, I may not wish the fortune thine;
	Grandam, I will not wish thy fortunes thrive:
	Whoever wins, on that side shall I lose
	Assured loss before the match be play'd.

LEWIS	Lady, with me, with me thy fortune lies.

BLANCH	There where my fortune lives, there my life dies.

KING JOHN	Cousin, go draw our puissance together.

	[Exit BASTARD]

	France, I am burn'd up with inflaming wrath;
	A rage whose heat hath this condition,
	That nothing can allay, nothing but blood,
	The blood, and dearest-valued blood, of France.

KING PHILIP	Thy rage sham burn thee up, and thou shalt turn
	To ashes, ere our blood shall quench that fire:
	Look to thyself, thou art in jeopardy.

KING JOHN	No more than he that threats. To arms let's hie!

	[Exeunt]




	KING JOHN


ACT III



SCENE II	The same. Plains near Angiers.


	[Alarums, excursions. Enter the BASTARD, with
	AUSTRIA'S head]

BASTARD	Now, by my life, this day grows wondrous hot;
	Some airy devil hovers in the sky
	And pours down mischief. Austria's head lie there,
	While Philip breathes.

	[Enter KING JOHN, ARTHUR, and HUBERT]

KING JOHN	Hubert, keep this boy. Philip, make up:
	My mother is assailed in our tent,
	And ta'en, I fear.

BASTARD	                  My lord, I rescued her;
	Her highness is in safety, fear you not:
	But on, my liege; for very little pains
	Will bring this labour to an happy end.

	[Exeunt]




	KING JOHN


ACT III



SCENE III	The same.


	[Alarums, excursions, retreat. Enter KING JOHN,
	QUEEN ELINOR, ARTHUR, the BASTARD, HUBERT,
	and Lords]

KING JOHN	[To QUEEN ELINOR]  So shall it be; your grace shall
	stay behind
	So strongly guarded.

	[To ARTHUR]

		Cousin, look not sad:
	Thy grandam loves thee; and thy uncle will
	As dear be to thee as thy father was.

ARTHUR	O, this will make my mother die with grief!

KING JOHN	[To the BASTARD]  Cousin, away for England!
	haste before:
	And, ere our coming, see thou shake the bags
	Of hoarding abbots; imprisoned angels
	Set at liberty: the fat ribs of peace
	Must by the hungry now be fed upon:
	Use our commission in his utmost force.

BASTARD	Bell, book, and candle shall not drive me back,
	When gold and silver becks me to come on.
	I leave your highness. Grandam, I will pray,
	If ever I remember to be holy,
	For your fair safety; so, I kiss your hand.

ELINOR	Farewell, gentle cousin.

KING JOHN	Coz, farewell.

	[Exit the BASTARD]

QUEEN ELINOR	Come hither, little kinsman; hark, a word.

KING JOHN	Come hither, Hubert. O my gentle Hubert,
	We owe thee much! within this wall of flesh
	There is a soul counts thee her creditor
	And with advantage means to pay thy love:
	And my good friend, thy voluntary oath
	Lives in this bosom, dearly cherished.
	Give me thy hand. I had a thing to say,
	But I will fit it with some better time.
	By heaven, Hubert, I am almost ashamed
	To say what good respect I have of thee.

HUBERT	I am much bounden to your majesty.

KING JOHN	Good friend, thou hast no cause to say so yet,
	But thou shalt have; and creep time ne'er so slow,
	Yet it shall come from me to do thee good.
	I had a thing to say, but let it go:
	The sun is in the heaven, and the proud day,
	Attended with the pleasures of the world,
	Is all too wanton and too full of gawds
	To give me audience: if the midnight bell
	Did, with his iron tongue and brazen mouth,
	Sound on into the drowsy race of night;
	If this same were a churchyard where we stand,
	And thou possessed with a thousand wrongs,
	Or if that surly spirit, melancholy,
	Had baked thy blood and made it heavy-thick,
	Which else runs tickling up and down the veins,
	Making that idiot, laughter, keep men's eyes
	And strain their cheeks to idle merriment,
	A passion hateful to my purposes,
	Or if that thou couldst see me without eyes,
	Hear me without thine ears, and make reply
	Without a tongue, using conceit alone,
	Without eyes, ears and harmful sound of words;
	Then, in despite of brooded watchful day,
	I would into thy bosom pour my thoughts:
	But, ah, I will not! yet I love thee well;
	And, by my troth, I think thou lovest me well.

HUBERT	So well, that what you bid me undertake,
	Though that my death were adjunct to my act,
	By heaven, I would do it.

KING JOHN	Do not I know thou wouldst?
	Good Hubert, Hubert, Hubert, throw thine eye
	On yon young boy: I'll tell thee what, my friend,
	He is a very serpent in my way;
	And whereso'er this foot of mine doth tread,
	He lies before me: dost thou understand me?
	Thou art his keeper.

HUBERT	And I'll keep him so,
	That he shall not offend your majesty.

KING JOHN	Death.

HUBERT	My lord?

KING JOHN	       A grave.

HUBERT	                  He shall not live.

KING JOHN	Enough.
	I could be merry now. Hubert, I love thee;
	Well, I'll not say what I intend for thee:
	Remember. Madam, fare you well:
	I'll send those powers o'er to your majesty.

ELINOR	My blessing go with thee!

KING JOHN	For England, cousin, go:
	Hubert shall be your man, attend on you
	With all true duty. On toward Calais, ho!

	[Exeunt]




	KING JOHN


ACT III



SCENE IV	The same. KING PHILIP'S tent.


	[Enter KING PHILIP, LEWIS, CARDINAL PANDULPH,
	and Attendants]

KING PHILIP	So, by a roaring tempest on the flood,
	A whole armado of convicted sail
	Is scatter'd and disjoin'd from fellowship.

CARDINAL PANDULPH	Courage and comfort! all shall yet go well.

KING PHILIP	What can go well, when we have run so ill?
	Are we not beaten? Is not Angiers lost?
	Arthur ta'en prisoner? divers dear friends slain?
	And bloody England into England gone,
	O'erbearing interruption, spite of France?

LEWIS	What he hath won, that hath he fortified:
	So hot a speed with such advice disposed,
	Such temperate order in so fierce a cause,
	Doth want example: who hath read or heard
	Of any kindred action like to this?

KING PHILIP	Well could I bear that England had this praise,
	So we could find some pattern of our shame.

	[Enter CONSTANCE]

	Look, who comes here! a grave unto a soul;
	Holding the eternal spirit against her will,
	In the vile prison of afflicted breath.
	I prithee, lady, go away with me.

CONSTANCE	Lo, now I now see the issue of your peace.

KING PHILIP	Patience, good lady! comfort, gentle Constance!

CONSTANCE	No, I defy all counsel, all redress,
	But that which ends all counsel, true redress,
	Death, death; O amiable lovely death!
	Thou odouriferous stench! sound rottenness!
	Arise forth from the couch of lasting night,
	Thou hate and terror to prosperity,
	And I will kiss thy detestable bones
	And put my eyeballs in thy vaulty brows
	And ring these fingers with thy household worms
	And stop this gap of breath with fulsome dust
	And be a carrion monster like thyself:
	Come, grin on me, and I will think thou smilest
	And buss thee as thy wife. Misery's love,
	O, come to me!

KING PHILIP	                  O fair affliction, peace!

CONSTANCE	No, no, I will not, having breath to cry:
	O, that my tongue were in the thunder's mouth!
	Then with a passion would I shake the world;
	And rouse from sleep that fell anatomy
	Which cannot hear a lady's feeble voice,
	Which scorns a modern invocation.

CARDINAL PANDULPH	Lady, you utter madness, and not sorrow.

CONSTANCE	Thou art not holy to belie me so;
	I am not mad: this hair I tear is mine;
	My name is Constance; I was Geffrey's wife;
	Young Arthur is my son, and he is lost:
	I am not mad: I would to heaven I were!
	For then, 'tis like I should forget myself:
	O, if I could, what grief should I forget!
	Preach some philosophy to make me mad,
	And thou shalt be canonized, cardinal;
	For being not mad but sensible of grief,
	My reasonable part produces reason
	How I may be deliver'd of these woes,
	And teaches me to kill or hang myself:
	If I were mad, I should forget my son,
	Or madly think a babe of clouts were he:
	I am not mad; too well, too well I feel
	The different plague of each calamity.

KING PHILIP	Bind up those tresses. O, what love I note
	In the fair multitude of those her hairs!
	Where but by chance a silver drop hath fallen,
	Even to that drop ten thousand wiry friends
	Do glue themselves in sociable grief,
	Like true, inseparable, faithful loves,
	Sticking together in calamity.

CONSTANCE	To England, if you will.

KING PHILIP	Bind up your hairs.

CONSTANCE	Yes, that I will; and wherefore will I do it?
	I tore them from their bonds and cried aloud
	'O that these hands could so redeem my son,
	As they have given these hairs their liberty!'
	But now I envy at their liberty,
	And will again commit them to their bonds,
	Because my poor child is a prisoner.
	And, father cardinal, I have heard you say
	That we shall see and know our friends in heaven:
	If that be true, I shall see my boy again;
	For since the birth of Cain, the first male child,
	To him that did but yesterday suspire,
	There was not such a gracious creature born.
	But now will canker-sorrow eat my bud
	And chase the native beauty from his cheek
	And he will look as hollow as a ghost,
	As dim and meagre as an ague's fit,
	And so he'll die; and, rising so again,
	When I shall meet him in the court of heaven
	I shall not know him: therefore never, never
	Must I behold my pretty Arthur more.

CARDINAL PANDULPH	You hold too heinous a respect of grief.

CONSTANCE	He talks to me that never had a son.

KING PHILIP	You are as fond of grief as of your child.

CONSTANCE	Grief fills the room up of my absent child,
	Lies in his bed, walks up and down with me,
	Puts on his pretty looks, repeats his words,
	Remembers me of all his gracious parts,
	Stuffs out his vacant garments with his form;
	Then, have I reason to be fond of grief?
	Fare you well: had you such a loss as I,
	I could give better comfort than you do.
	I will not keep this form upon my head,
	When there is such disorder in my wit.
	O Lord! my boy, my Arthur, my fair son!
	My life, my joy, my food, my all the world!
	My widow-comfort, and my sorrows' cure!

	[Exit]

KING PHILIP	I fear some outrage, and I'll follow her.

	[Exit]

LEWIS	There's nothing in this world can make me joy:
	Life is as tedious as a twice-told tale
	Vexing the dull ear of a drowsy man;
	And bitter shame hath spoil'd the sweet world's taste
	That it yields nought but shame and bitterness.

CARDINAL PANDULPH	Before the curing of a strong disease,
	Even in the instant of repair and health,
	The fit is strongest; evils that take leave,
	On their departure most of all show evil:
	What have you lost by losing of this day?

LEWIS	All days of glory, joy and happiness.

CARDINAL PANDULPH	If you had won it, certainly you had.
	No, no; when Fortune means to men most good,
	She looks upon them with a threatening eye.
	'Tis strange to think how much King John hath lost
	In this which he accounts so clearly won:
	Are not you grieved that Arthur is his prisoner?

LEWIS	As heartily as he is glad he hath him.

CARDINAL PANDULPH	Your mind is all as youthful as your blood.
	Now hear me speak with a prophetic spirit;
	For even the breath of what I mean to speak
	Shall blow each dust, each straw, each little rub,
	Out of the path which shall directly lead
	Thy foot to England's throne; and therefore mark.
	John hath seized Arthur; and it cannot be
	That, whiles warm life plays in that infant's veins,
	The misplaced John should entertain an hour,
	One minute, nay, one quiet breath of rest.
	A sceptre snatch'd with an unruly hand
	Must be as boisterously maintain'd as gain'd;
	And he that stands upon a slippery place
	Makes nice of no vile hold to stay him up:
	That John may stand, then Arthur needs must fall;
	So be it, for it cannot be but so.

LEWIS	But what shall I gain by young Arthur's fall?

CARDINAL PANDULPH	You, in the right of Lady Blanch your wife,
	May then make all the claim that Arthur did.

LEWIS	And lose it, life and all, as Arthur did.

CARDINAL PANDULPH	How green you are and fresh in this old world!
	John lays you plots; the times conspire with you;
	For he that steeps his safety in true blood
	Shall find but bloody safety and untrue.
	This act so evilly born shall cool the hearts
	Of all his people and freeze up their zeal,
	That none so small advantage shall step forth
	To cheque his reign, but they will cherish it;
	No natural exhalation in the sky,
	No scope of nature, no distemper'd day,
	No common wind, no customed event,
	But they will pluck away his natural cause
	And call them meteors, prodigies and signs,
	Abortives, presages and tongues of heaven,
	Plainly denouncing vengeance upon John.

LEWIS	May be he will not touch young Arthur's life,
	But hold himself safe in his prisonment.

CARDINAL PANDULPH	O, sir, when he shall hear of your approach,
	If that young Arthur be not gone already,
	Even at that news he dies; and then the hearts
	Of all his people shall revolt from him
	And kiss the lips of unacquainted change
	And pick strong matter of revolt and wrath
	Out of the bloody fingers' ends of John.
	Methinks I see this hurly all on foot:
	And, O, what better matter breeds for you
	Than I have named! The bastard Faulconbridge
	Is now in England, ransacking the church,
	Offending charity: if but a dozen French
	Were there in arms, they would be as a call
	To train ten thousand English to their side,
	Or as a little snow, tumbled about,
	Anon becomes a mountain. O noble Dauphin,
	Go with me to the king: 'tis wonderful
	What may be wrought out of their discontent,
	Now that their souls are topful of offence.
	For England go: I will whet on the king.

LEWIS	Strong reasons make strong actions: let us go:
	If you say ay, the king will not say no.

	[Exeunt]




	KING JOHN


ACT IV



SCENE I	A room in a castle.


	[Enter HUBERT and Executioners]

HUBERT	Heat me these irons hot; and look thou stand
	Within the arras: when I strike my foot
	Upon the bosom of the ground, rush forth,
	And bind the boy which you shall find with me
	Fast to the chair: be heedful: hence, and watch.

First Executioner	I hope your warrant will bear out the deed.

HUBERT	Uncleanly scruples! fear not you: look to't.

	[Exeunt Executioners]

	Young lad, come forth; I have to say with you.

	[Enter ARTHUR]

ARTHUR	Good morrow, Hubert.

HUBERT	Good morrow, little prince.

ARTHUR	As little prince, having so great a title
	To be more prince, as may be. You are sad.

HUBERT	Indeed, I have been merrier.

ARTHUR	Mercy on me!
	Methinks no body should be sad but I:
	Yet, I remember, when I was in France,
	Young gentlemen would be as sad as night,
	Only for wantonness. By my christendom,
	So I were out of prison and kept sheep,
	I should be as merry as the day is long;
	And so I would be here, but that I doubt
	My uncle practises more harm to me:
	He is afraid of me and I of him:
	Is it my fault that I was Geffrey's son?
	No, indeed, is't not; and I would to heaven
	I were your son, so you would love me, Hubert.

HUBERT	[Aside]  If I talk to him, with his innocent prate
	He will awake my mercy which lies dead:
	Therefore I will be sudden and dispatch.

ARTHUR	Are you sick, Hubert? you look pale to-day:
	In sooth, I would you were a little sick,
	That I might sit all night and watch with you:
	I warrant I love you more than you do me.

HUBERT	[Aside]  His words do take possession of my bosom.
	Read here, young Arthur.

	[Showing a paper]

	[Aside]

		   How now, foolish rheum!
	Turning dispiteous torture out of door!
	I must be brief, lest resolution drop
	Out at mine eyes in tender womanish tears.
	Can you not read it? Is it not fair writ?

ARTHUR	Too fairly, Hubert, for so foul effect:
	Must you with hot irons burn out both mine eyes?

HUBERT	Young boy, I must.

ARTHUR	                  And will you?

HUBERT	And I will.

ARTHUR	Have you the heart? When your head did but ache,
	I knit my handercher about your brows,
	The best I had, a princess wrought it me,
	And I did never ask it you again;
	And with my hand at midnight held your head,
	And like the watchful minutes to the hour,
	Still and anon cheer'd up the heavy time,
	Saying, 'What lack you?' and 'Where lies your grief?'
	Or 'What good love may I perform for you?'
	Many a poor man's son would have lien still
	And ne'er have spoke a loving word to you;
	But you at your sick service had a prince.
	Nay, you may think my love was crafty love
	And call it cunning: do, an if you will:
	If heaven be pleased that you must use me ill,
	Why then you must. Will you put out mine eyes?
	These eyes that never did nor never shall
	So much as frown on you.

HUBERT	I have sworn to do it;
	And with hot irons must I burn them out.

ARTHUR	Ah, none but in this iron age would do it!
	The iron of itself, though heat red-hot,
	Approaching near these eyes, would drink my tears
	And quench his fiery indignation
	Even in the matter of mine innocence;
	Nay, after that, consume away in rust
	But for containing fire to harm mine eye.
	Are you more stubborn-hard than hammer'd iron?
	An if an angel should have come to me
	And told me Hubert should put out mine eyes,
	I would not have believed him,--no tongue but Hubert's.

HUBERT	Come forth.

	[Stamps]

	[Re-enter Executioners, with a cord, irons, &c]

	Do as I bid you do.

ARTHUR	O, save me, Hubert, save me! my eyes are out
	Even with the fierce looks of these bloody men.

HUBERT	Give me the iron, I say, and bind him here.

ARTHUR	Alas, what need you be so boisterous-rough?
	I will not struggle, I will stand stone-still.
	For heaven sake, Hubert, let me not be bound!
	Nay, hear me, Hubert, drive these men away,
	And I will sit as quiet as a lamb;
	I will not stir, nor wince, nor speak a word,
	Nor look upon the iron angerly:
	Thrust but these men away, and I'll forgive you,
	Whatever torment you do put me to.

HUBERT	Go, stand within; let me alone with him.

First Executioner	I am best pleased to be from such a deed.

	[Exeunt Executioners]

ARTHUR	Alas, I then have chid away my friend!
	He hath a stern look, but a gentle heart:
	Let him come back, that his compassion may
	Give life to yours.

HUBERT	Come, boy, prepare yourself.

ARTHUR	Is there no remedy?

HUBERT	None, but to lose your eyes.

ARTHUR	O heaven, that there were but a mote in yours,
	A grain, a dust, a gnat, a wandering hair,
	Any annoyance in that precious sense!
	Then feeling what small things are boisterous there,
	Your vile intent must needs seem horrible.

HUBERT	Is this your promise? go to, hold your tongue.

ARTHUR	Hubert, the utterance of a brace of tongues
	Must needs want pleading for a pair of eyes:
	Let me not hold my tongue, let me not, Hubert;
	Or, Hubert, if you will, cut out my tongue,
	So I may keep mine eyes: O, spare mine eyes.
	Though to no use but still to look on you!
	Lo, by my truth, the instrument is cold
	And would not harm me.

HUBERT	I can heat it, boy.

ARTHUR	No, in good sooth: the fire is dead with grief,
	Being create for comfort, to be used
	In undeserved extremes: see else yourself;
	There is no malice in this burning coal;
	The breath of heaven has blown his spirit out
	And strew'd repentent ashes on his head.

HUBERT	But with my breath I can revive it, boy.

ARTHUR	An if you do, you will but make it blush
	And glow with shame of your proceedings, Hubert:
	Nay, it perchance will sparkle in your eyes;
	And like a dog that is compell'd to fight,
	Snatch at his master that doth tarre him on.
	All things that you should use to do me wrong
	Deny their office: only you do lack
	That mercy which fierce fire and iron extends,
	Creatures of note for mercy-lacking uses.

HUBERT	Well, see to live; I will not touch thine eye
	For all the treasure that thine uncle owes:
	Yet am I sworn and I did purpose, boy,
	With this same very iron to burn them out.

ARTHUR	O, now you look like Hubert! all this while
	You were disguised.

HUBERT	Peace; no more. Adieu.
	Your uncle must not know but you are dead;
	I'll fill these dogged spies with false reports:
	And, pretty child, sleep doubtless and secure,
	That Hubert, for the wealth of all the world,
	Will not offend thee.

ARTHUR	O heaven! I thank you, Hubert.

HUBERT	Silence; no more: go closely in with me:
	Much danger do I undergo for thee.

	[Exeunt]




	KING JOHN


ACT IV



SCENE II	KING JOHN'S palace.


	[Enter KING JOHN, PEMBROKE, SALISBURY, and other Lords]

KING JOHN	Here once again we sit, once again crown'd,
	And looked upon, I hope, with cheerful eyes.

PEMBROKE	This 'once again,' but that your highness pleased,
	Was once superfluous: you were crown'd before,
	And that high royalty was ne'er pluck'd off,
	The faiths of men ne'er stained with revolt;
	Fresh expectation troubled not the land
	With any long'd-for change or better state.

SALISBURY	Therefore, to be possess'd with double pomp,
	To guard a title that was rich before,
	To gild refined gold, to paint the lily,
	To throw a perfume on the violet,
	To smooth the ice, or add another hue
	Unto the rainbow, or with taper-light
	To seek the beauteous eye of heaven to garnish,
	Is wasteful and ridiculous excess.

PEMBROKE	But that your royal pleasure must be done,
	This act is as an ancient tale new told,
	And in the last repeating troublesome,
	Being urged at a time unseasonable.

SALISBURY	In this the antique and well noted face
	Of plain old form is much disfigured;
	And, like a shifted wind unto a sail,
	It makes the course of thoughts to fetch about,
	Startles and frights consideration,
	Makes sound opinion sick and truth suspected,
	For putting on so new a fashion'd robe.

PEMBROKE	When workmen strive to do better than well,
	They do confound their skill in covetousness;
	And oftentimes excusing of a fault
	Doth make the fault the worse by the excuse,
	As patches set upon a little breach
	Discredit more in hiding of the fault
	Than did the fault before it was so patch'd.

SALISBURY	To this effect, before you were new crown'd,
	We breathed our counsel: but it pleased your highness
	To overbear it, and we are all well pleased,
	Since all and every part of what we would
	Doth make a stand at what your highness will.

KING JOHN	Some reasons of this double coronation
	I have possess'd you with and think them strong;
	And more, more strong, then lesser is my fear,
	I shall indue you with: meantime but ask
	What you would have reform'd that is not well,
	And well shall you perceive how willingly
	I will both hear and grant you your requests.

PEMBROKE	Then I, as one that am the tongue of these,
	To sound the purpose of all their hearts,
	Both for myself and them, but, chief of all,
	Your safety, for the which myself and them
	Bend their best studies, heartily request
	The enfranchisement of Arthur; whose restraint
	Doth move the murmuring lips of discontent
	To break into this dangerous argument,--
	If what in rest you have in right you hold,
	Why then your fears, which, as they say, attend
	The steps of wrong, should move you to mew up
	Your tender kinsman and to choke his days
	With barbarous ignorance and deny his youth
	The rich advantage of good exercise?
	That the time's enemies may not have this
	To grace occasions, let it be our suit
	That you have bid us ask his liberty;
	Which for our goods we do no further ask
	Than whereupon our weal, on you depending,
	Counts it your weal he have his liberty.

	[Enter HUBERT]

KING JOHN	Let it be so: I do commit his youth
	To your direction. Hubert, what news with you?

	[Taking him apart]

PEMBROKE	This is the man should do the bloody deed;
	He show'd his warrant to a friend of mine:
	The image of a wicked heinous fault
	Lives in his eye; that close aspect of his
	Does show the mood of a much troubled breast;
	And I do fearfully believe 'tis done,
	What we so fear'd he had a charge to do.

SALISBURY	The colour of the king doth come and go
	Between his purpose and his conscience,
	Like heralds 'twixt two dreadful battles set:
	His passion is so ripe, it needs must break.

PEMBROKE	And when it breaks, I fear will issue thence
	The foul corruption of a sweet child's death.

KING JOHN	We cannot hold mortality's strong hand:
	Good lords, although my will to give is living,
	The suit which you demand is gone and dead:
	He tells us Arthur is deceased to-night.

SALISBURY	Indeed we fear'd his sickness was past cure.

PEMBROKE	Indeed we heard how near his death he was
	Before the child himself felt he was sick:
	This must be answer'd either here or hence.

KING JOHN	Why do you bend such solemn brows on me?
	Think you I bear the shears of destiny?
	Have I commandment on the pulse of life?

SALISBURY	It is apparent foul play; and 'tis shame
	That greatness should so grossly offer it:
	So thrive it in your game! and so, farewell.

PEMBROKE	Stay yet, Lord Salisbury; I'll go with thee,
	And find the inheritance of this poor child,
	His little kingdom of a forced grave.
	That blood which owed the breadth of all this isle,
	Three foot of it doth hold: bad world the while!
	This must not be thus borne: this will break out
	To all our sorrows, and ere long I doubt.

	[Exeunt Lords]

KING JOHN	They burn in indignation. I repent:
	There is no sure foundation set on blood,
	No certain life achieved by others' death.

	[Enter a Messenger]

	A fearful eye thou hast: where is that blood
	That I have seen inhabit in those cheeks?
	So foul a sky clears not without a storm:
	Pour down thy weather: how goes all in France?

Messenger	From France to England. Never such a power
	For any foreign preparation
	Was levied in the body of a land.
	The copy of your speed is learn'd by them;
	For when you should be told they do prepare,
	The tidings come that they are all arrived.

KING JOHN	O, where hath our intelligence been drunk?
	Where hath it slept? Where is my mother's care,
	That such an army could be drawn in France,
	And she not hear of it?

Messenger	My liege, her ear
	Is stopp'd with dust; the first of April died
	Your noble mother: and, as I hear, my lord,
	The Lady Constance in a frenzy died
	Three days before: but this from rumour's tongue
	I idly heard; if true or false I know not.

KING JOHN	Withhold thy speed, dreadful occasion!
	O, make a league with me, till I have pleased
	My discontented peers! What! mother dead!
	How wildly then walks my estate in France!
	Under whose conduct came those powers of France
	That thou for truth givest out are landed here?

Messenger	Under the Dauphin.

KING JOHN	                  Thou hast made me giddy
	With these ill tidings.

	[Enter the BASTARD and PETER of Pomfret]

		  Now, what says the world
	To your proceedings? do not seek to stuff
	My head with more ill news, for it is full.

BASTARD	But if you be afeard to hear the worst,
	Then let the worst unheard fall on your bead.

KING JOHN	Bear with me cousin, for I was amazed
	Under the tide: but now I breathe again
	Aloft the flood, and can give audience
	To any tongue, speak it of what it will.

BASTARD	How I have sped among the clergymen,
	The sums I have collected shall express.
	But as I travell'd hither through the land,
	I find the people strangely fantasied;
	Possess'd with rumours, full of idle dreams,
	Not knowing what they fear, but full of fear:
	And here a prophet, that I brought with me
	From forth the streets of Pomfret, whom I found
	With many hundreds treading on his heels;
	To whom he sung, in rude harsh-sounding rhymes,
	That, ere the next Ascension-day at noon,
	Your highness should deliver up your crown.

KING JOHN	Thou idle dreamer, wherefore didst thou so?

PETER	Foreknowing that the truth will fall out so.

KING JOHN	Hubert, away with him; imprison him;
	And on that day at noon whereon he says
	I shall yield up my crown, let him be hang'd.
	Deliver him to safety; and return,
	For I must use thee.

	[Exeunt HUBERT with PETER]

		O my gentle cousin,
	Hear'st thou the news abroad, who are arrived?

BASTARD	The French, my lord; men's mouths are full of it:
	Besides, I met Lord Bigot and Lord Salisbury,
	With eyes as red as new-enkindled fire,
	And others more, going to seek the grave
	Of Arthur, who they say is kill'd to-night
	On your suggestion.

KING JOHN	Gentle kinsman, go,
	And thrust thyself into their companies:
	I have a way to win their loves again;
	Bring them before me.

BASTARD	I will seek them out.

KING JOHN	Nay, but make haste; the better foot before.
	O, let me have no subject enemies,
	When adverse foreigners affright my towns
	With dreadful pomp of stout invasion!
	Be Mercury, set feathers to thy heels,
	And fly like thought from them to me again.

BASTARD	The spirit of the time shall teach me speed.

	[Exit]

KING JOHN	Spoke like a sprightful noble gentleman.
	Go after him; for he perhaps shall need
	Some messenger betwixt me and the peers;
	And be thou he.

Messenger	                  With all my heart, my liege.

	[Exit]

KING JOHN	My mother dead!

	[Re-enter HUBERT]

HUBERT	My lord, they say five moons were seen to-night;
	Four fixed, and the fifth did whirl about
	The other four in wondrous motion.

KING JOHN	Five moons!

HUBERT	Old men and beldams in the streets
	Do prophesy upon it dangerously:
	Young Arthur's death is common in their mouths:
	And when they talk of him, they shake their heads
	And whisper one another in the ear;
	And he that speaks doth gripe the hearer's wrist,
	Whilst he that hears makes fearful action,
	With wrinkled brows, with nods, with rolling eyes.
	I saw a smith stand with his hammer, thus,
	The whilst his iron did on the anvil cool,
	With open mouth swallowing a tailor's news;
	Who, with his shears and measure in his hand,
	Standing on slippers, which his nimble haste
	Had falsely thrust upon contrary feet,
	Told of a many thousand warlike French
	That were embattailed and rank'd in Kent:
	Another lean unwash'd artificer
	Cuts off his tale and talks of Arthur's death.

KING JOHN	Why seek'st thou to possess me with these fears?
	Why urgest thou so oft young Arthur's death?
	Thy hand hath murder'd him: I had a mighty cause
	To wish him dead, but thou hadst none to kill him.

HUBERT	No had, my lord! why, did you not provoke me?

KING JOHN	It is the curse of kings to be attended
	By slaves that take their humours for a warrant
	To break within the bloody house of life,
	And on the winking of authority
	To understand a law, to know the meaning
	Of dangerous majesty, when perchance it frowns
	More upon humour than advised respect.

HUBERT	Here is your hand and seal for what I did.

KING JOHN	O, when the last account 'twixt heaven and earth
	Is to be made, then shall this hand and seal
	Witness against us to damnation!
	How oft the sight of means to do ill deeds
	Make deeds ill done! Hadst not thou been by,
	A fellow by the hand of nature mark'd,
	Quoted and sign'd to do a deed of shame,
	This murder had not come into my mind:
	But taking note of thy abhorr'd aspect,
	Finding thee fit for bloody villany,
	Apt, liable to be employ'd in danger,
	I faintly broke with thee of Arthur's death;
	And thou, to be endeared to a king,
	Made it no conscience to destroy a prince.

HUBERT	My lord--

KING JOHN	Hadst thou but shook thy head or made a pause
	When I spake darkly what I purposed,
	Or turn'd an eye of doubt upon my face,
	As bid me tell my tale in express words,
	Deep shame had struck me dumb, made me break off,
	And those thy fears might have wrought fears in me:
	But thou didst understand me by my signs
	And didst in signs again parley with sin;
	Yea, without stop, didst let thy heart consent,
	And consequently thy rude hand to act
	The deed, which both our tongues held vile to name.
	Out of my sight, and never see me more!
	My nobles leave me; and my state is braved,
	Even at my gates, with ranks of foreign powers:
	Nay, in the body of this fleshly land,
	This kingdom, this confine of blood and breath,
	Hostility and civil tumult reigns
	Between my conscience and my cousin's death.

HUBERT	Arm you against your other enemies,
	I'll make a peace between your soul and you.
	Young Arthur is alive: this hand of mine
	Is yet a maiden and an innocent hand,
	Not painted with the crimson spots of blood.
	Within this bosom never enter'd yet
	The dreadful motion of a murderous thought;
	And you have slander'd nature in my form,
	Which, howsoever rude exteriorly,
	Is yet the cover of a fairer mind
	Than to be butcher of an innocent child.

KING JOHN	Doth Arthur live? O, haste thee to the peers,
	Throw this report on their incensed rage,
	And make them tame to their obedience!
	Forgive the comment that my passion made
	Upon thy feature; for my rage was blind,
	And foul imaginary eyes of blood
	Presented thee more hideous than thou art.
	O, answer not, but to my closet bring
	The angry lords with all expedient haste.
	I conjure thee but slowly; run more fast.

	[Exeunt]




	KING JOHN


ACT IV



SCENE III	Before the castle.


	[Enter ARTHUR, on the walls]

ARTHUR	The wall is high, and yet will I leap down:
	Good ground, be pitiful and hurt me not!
	There's few or none do know me: if they did,
	This ship-boy's semblance hath disguised me quite.
	I am afraid; and yet I'll venture it.
	If I get down, and do not break my limbs,
	I'll find a thousand shifts to get away:
	As good to die and go, as die and stay.

	[Leaps down]

	O me! my uncle's spirit is in these stones:
	Heaven take my soul, and England keep my bones!

	[Dies]

	[Enter PEMBROKE, SALISBURY, and BIGOT]

SALISBURY	Lords, I will meet him at Saint Edmundsbury:
	It is our safety, and we must embrace
	This gentle offer of the perilous time.

PEMBROKE	Who brought that letter from the cardinal?

SALISBURY	The Count Melun, a noble lord of France,
	Whose private with me of the Dauphin's love
	Is much more general than these lines import.

BIGOT	To-morrow morning let us meet him then.

SALISBURY	Or rather then set forward; for 'twill be
	Two long days' journey, lords, or ere we meet.

	[Enter the BASTARD]

BASTARD	Once more to-day well met, distemper'd lords!
	The king by me requests your presence straight.

SALISBURY	The king hath dispossess'd himself of us:
	We will not line his thin bestained cloak
	With our pure honours, nor attend the foot
	That leaves the print of blood where'er it walks.
	Return and tell him so: we know the worst.

BASTARD	Whate'er you think, good words, I think, were best.

SALISBURY	Our griefs, and not our manners, reason now.

BASTARD	But there is little reason in your grief;
	Therefore 'twere reason you had manners now.

PEMBROKE	Sir, sir, impatience hath his privilege.

BASTARD	'Tis true, to hurt his master, no man else.

SALISBURY	This is the prison. What is he lies here?

	[Seeing ARTHUR]

PEMBROKE	O death, made proud with pure and princely beauty!
	The earth had not a hole to hide this deed.

SALISBURY	Murder, as hating what himself hath done,
	Doth lay it open to urge on revenge.

BIGOT	Or, when he doom'd this beauty to a grave,
	Found it too precious-princely for a grave.

SALISBURY	Sir Richard, what think you? have you beheld,
	Or have you read or heard? or could you think?
	Or do you almost think, although you see,
	That you do see? could thought, without this object,
	Form such another? This is the very top,
	The height, the crest, or crest unto the crest,
	Of murder's arms: this is the bloodiest shame,
	The wildest savagery, the vilest stroke,
	That ever wall-eyed wrath or staring rage
	Presented to the tears of soft remorse.

PEMBROKE	All murders past do stand excused in this:
	And this, so sole and so unmatchable,
	Shall give a holiness, a purity,
	To the yet unbegotten sin of times;
	And prove a deadly bloodshed but a jest,
	Exampled by this heinous spectacle.

BASTARD	It is a damned and a bloody work;
	The graceless action of a heavy hand,
	If that it be the work of any hand.

SALISBURY	If that it be the work of any hand!
	We had a kind of light what would ensue:
	It is the shameful work of Hubert's hand;
	The practise and the purpose of the king:
	From whose obedience I forbid my soul,
	Kneeling before this ruin of sweet life,
	And breathing to his breathless excellence
	The incense of a vow, a holy vow,
	Never to taste the pleasures of the world,
	Never to be infected with delight,
	Nor conversant with ease and idleness,
	Till I have set a glory to this hand,
	By giving it the worship of revenge.


PEMBROKE	|
	|  Our souls religiously confirm thy words.
BIGOT	|


	[Enter HUBERT]

HUBERT	Lords, I am hot with haste in seeking you:
	Arthur doth live; the king hath sent for you.

SALISBURY	O, he is old and blushes not at death.
	Avaunt, thou hateful villain, get thee gone!

HUBERT	I am no villain.

SALISBURY	                  Must I rob the law?

	[Drawing his sword]

BASTARD	Your sword is bright, sir; put it up again.

SALISBURY	Not till I sheathe it in a murderer's skin.

HUBERT	Stand back, Lord Salisbury, stand back, I say;
	By heaven, I think my sword's as sharp as yours:
	I would not have you, lord, forget yourself,
	Nor tempt the danger of my true defence;
	Lest I, by marking of your rage, forget
	Your worth, your greatness and nobility.

BIGOT	Out, dunghill! darest thou brave a nobleman?

HUBERT	Not for my life: but yet I dare defend
	My innocent life against an emperor.

SALISBURY	Thou art a murderer.

HUBERT	Do not prove me so;
	Yet I am none: whose tongue soe'er speaks false,
	Not truly speaks; who speaks not truly, lies.

PEMBROKE	Cut him to pieces.

BASTARD	                  Keep the peace, I say.

SALISBURY	Stand by, or I shall gall you, Faulconbridge.

BASTARD	Thou wert better gall the devil, Salisbury:
	If thou but frown on me, or stir thy foot,
	Or teach thy hasty spleen to do me shame,
	I'll strike thee dead. Put up thy sword betime;
	Or I'll so maul you and your toasting-iron,
	That you shall think the devil is come from hell.

BIGOT	What wilt thou do, renowned Faulconbridge?
	Second a villain and a murderer?

HUBERT	Lord Bigot, I am none.

BIGOT	Who kill'd this prince?

HUBERT	'Tis not an hour since I left him well:
	I honour'd him, I loved him, and will weep
	My date of life out for his sweet life's loss.

SALISBURY	Trust not those cunning waters of his eyes,
	For villany is not without such rheum;
	And he, long traded in it, makes it seem
	Like rivers of remorse and innocency.
	Away with me, all you whose souls abhor
	The uncleanly savours of a slaughter-house;
	For I am stifled with this smell of sin.

BIGOT	Away toward Bury, to the Dauphin there!

PEMBROKE	There tell the king he may inquire us out.

	[Exeunt Lords]

BASTARD	Here's a good world! Knew you of this fair work?
	Beyond the infinite and boundless reach
	Of mercy, if thou didst this deed of death,
	Art thou damn'd, Hubert.

HUBERT	Do but hear me, sir.

BASTARD	Ha! I'll tell thee what;
	Thou'rt damn'd as black--nay, nothing is so black;
	Thou art more deep damn'd than Prince Lucifer:
	There is not yet so ugly a fiend of hell
	As thou shalt be, if thou didst kill this child.

HUBERT	Upon my soul--

BASTARD	                  If thou didst but consent
	To this most cruel act, do but despair;
	And if thou want'st a cord, the smallest thread
	That ever spider twisted from her womb
	Will serve to strangle thee, a rush will be a beam
	To hang thee on; or wouldst thou drown thyself,
	Put but a little water in a spoon,
	And it shall be as all the ocean,
	Enough to stifle such a villain up.
	I do suspect thee very grievously.

HUBERT	If I in act, consent, or sin of thought,
	Be guilty of the stealing that sweet breath
	Which was embounded in this beauteous clay,
	Let hell want pains enough to torture me.
	I left him well.

BASTARD	                  Go, bear him in thine arms.
	I am amazed, methinks, and lose my way
	Among the thorns and dangers of this world.
	How easy dost thou take all England up!
	From forth this morsel of dead royalty,
	The life, the right and truth of all this realm
	Is fled to heaven; and England now is left
	To tug and scamble and to part by the teeth
	The unowed interest of proud-swelling state.
	Now for the bare-pick'd bone of majesty
	Doth dogged war bristle his angry crest
	And snarleth in the gentle eyes of peace:
	Now powers from home and discontents at home
	Meet in one line; and vast confusion waits,
	As doth a raven on a sick-fall'n beast,
	The imminent decay of wrested pomp.
	Now happy he whose cloak and cincture can
	Hold out this tempest. Bear away that child
	And follow me with speed: I'll to the king:
	A thousand businesses are brief in hand,
	And heaven itself doth frown upon the land.

	[Exeunt]



	KING JOHN


ACT V



SCENE I	KING JOHN'S palace.


	[Enter KING JOHN, CARDINAL PANDULPH, and Attendants]

KING JOHN	Thus have I yielded up into your hand
	The circle of my glory.

	[Giving the crown]

CARDINAL PANDULPH	Take again
	From this my hand, as holding of the pope
	Your sovereign greatness and authority.

KING JOHN	Now keep your holy word: go meet the French,
	And from his holiness use all your power
	To stop their marches 'fore we are inflamed.
	Our discontented counties do revolt;
	Our people quarrel with obedience,
	Swearing allegiance and the love of soul
	To stranger blood, to foreign royalty.
	This inundation of mistemper'd humour
	Rests by you only to be qualified:
	Then pause not; for the present time's so sick,
	That present medicine must be minister'd,
	Or overthrow incurable ensues.

CARDINAL PANDULPH	It was my breath that blew this tempest up,
	Upon your stubborn usage of the pope;
	But since you are a gentle convertite,
	My tongue shall hush again this storm of war
	And make fair weather in your blustering land.
	On this Ascension-day, remember well,
	Upon your oath of service to the pope,
	Go I to make the French lay down their arms.

	[Exit]

KING JOHN	Is this Ascension-day? Did not the prophet
	Say that before Ascension-day at noon
	My crown I should give off? Even so I have:
	I did suppose it should be on constraint:
	But, heaven be thank'd, it is but voluntary.

	[Enter the BASTARD]

BASTARD	All Kent hath yielded; nothing there holds out
	But Dover castle: London hath received,
	Like a kind host, the Dauphin and his powers:
	Your nobles will not hear you, but are gone
	To offer service to your enemy,
	And wild amazement hurries up and down
	The little number of your doubtful friends.

KING JOHN	Would not my lords return to me again,
	After they heard young Arthur was alive?

BASTARD	They found him dead and cast into the streets,
	An empty casket, where the jewel of life
	By some damn'd hand was robb'd and ta'en away.

KING JOHN	That villain Hubert told me he did live.

BASTARD	So, on my soul, he did, for aught he knew.
	But wherefore do you droop? why look you sad?
	Be great in act, as you have been in thought;
	Let not the world see fear and sad distrust
	Govern the motion of a kingly eye:
	Be stirring as the time; be fire with fire;
	Threaten the threatener and outface the brow
	Of bragging horror: so shall inferior eyes,
	That borrow their behaviors from the great,
	Grow great by your example and put on
	The dauntless spirit of resolution.
	Away, and glister like the god of war,
	When he intendeth to become the field:
	Show boldness and aspiring confidence.
	What, shall they seek the lion in his den,
	And fright him there? and make him tremble there?
	O, let it not be said: forage, and run
	To meet displeasure farther from the doors,
	And grapple with him ere he comes so nigh.

KING JOHN	The legate of the pope hath been with me,
	And I have made a happy peace with him;
	And he hath promised to dismiss the powers
	Led by the Dauphin.

BASTARD	O inglorious league!
	Shall we, upon the footing of our land,
	Send fair-play orders and make compromise,
	Insinuation, parley and base truce
	To arms invasive? shall a beardless boy,
	A cocker'd silken wanton, brave our fields,
	And flesh his spirit in a warlike soil,
	Mocking the air with colours idly spread,
	And find no cheque? Let us, my liege, to arms:
	Perchance the cardinal cannot make your peace;
	Or if he do, let it at least be said
	They saw we had a purpose of defence.

KING JOHN	Have thou the ordering of this present time.

BASTARD	Away, then, with good courage! yet, I know,
	Our party may well meet a prouder foe.

	[Exeunt]




	KING JOHN


ACT V



SCENE II	LEWIS's camp at St. Edmundsbury.


	[Enter, in arms, LEWIS, SALISBURY, MELUN, PEMBROKE,
	BIGOT, and Soldiers]

LEWIS	My Lord Melun, let this be copied out,
	And keep it safe for our remembrance:
	Return the precedent to these lords again;
	That, having our fair order written down,
	Both they and we, perusing o'er these notes,
	May know wherefore we took the sacrament
	And keep our faiths firm and inviolable.

SALISBURY	Upon our sides it never shall be broken.
	And, noble Dauphin, albeit we swear
	A voluntary zeal and an unurged faith
	To your proceedings; yet believe me, prince,
	I am not glad that such a sore of time
	Should seek a plaster by contemn'd revolt,
	And heal the inveterate canker of one wound
	By making many. O, it grieves my soul,
	That I must draw this metal from my side
	To be a widow-maker! O, and there
	Where honourable rescue and defence
	Cries out upon the name of Salisbury!
	But such is the infection of the time,
	That, for the health and physic of our right,
	We cannot deal but with the very hand
	Of stern injustice and confused wrong.
	And is't not pity, O my grieved friends,
	That we, the sons and children of this isle,
	Were born to see so sad an hour as this;
	Wherein we step after a stranger march
	Upon her gentle bosom, and fill up
	Her enemies' ranks,--I must withdraw and weep
	Upon the spot of this enforced cause,--
	To grace the gentry of a land remote,
	And follow unacquainted colours here?
	What, here? O nation, that thou couldst remove!
	That Neptune's arms, who clippeth thee about,
	Would bear thee from the knowledge of thyself,
	And grapple thee unto a pagan shore;
	Where these two Christian armies might combine
	The blood of malice in a vein of league,
	And not to spend it so unneighbourly!

LEWIS	A noble temper dost thou show in this;
	And great affections wrestling in thy bosom
	Doth make an earthquake of nobility.
	O, what a noble combat hast thou fought
	Between compulsion and a brave respect!
	Let me wipe off this honourable dew,
	That silverly doth progress on thy cheeks:
	My heart hath melted at a lady's tears,
	Being an ordinary inundation;
	But this effusion of such manly drops,
	This shower, blown up by tempest of the soul,
	Startles mine eyes, and makes me more amazed
	Than had I seen the vaulty top of heaven
	Figured quite o'er with burning meteors.
	Lift up thy brow, renowned Salisbury,
	And with a great heart heave away the storm:
	Commend these waters to those baby eyes
	That never saw the giant world enraged;
	Nor met with fortune other than at feasts,
	Full of warm blood, of mirth, of gossiping.
	Come, come; for thou shalt thrust thy hand as deep
	Into the purse of rich prosperity
	As Lewis himself: so, nobles, shall you all,
	That knit your sinews to the strength of mine.
	And even there, methinks, an angel spake:

	[Enter CARDINAL PANDULPH]

	Look, where the holy legate comes apace,
	To give us warrant from the hand of heaven
	And on our actions set the name of right
	With holy breath.

CARDINAL PANDULPH	                  Hail, noble prince of France!
	The next is this, King John hath reconciled
	Himself to Rome; his spirit is come in,
	That so stood out against the holy church,
	The great metropolis and see of Rome:
	Therefore thy threatening colours now wind up;
	And tame the savage spirit of wild war,
	That like a lion foster'd up at hand,
	It may lie gently at the foot of peace,
	And be no further harmful than in show.

LEWIS	Your grace shall pardon me, I will not back:
	I am too high-born to be propertied,
	To be a secondary at control,
	Or useful serving-man and instrument,
	To any sovereign state throughout the world.
	Your breath first kindled the dead coal of wars
	Between this chastised kingdom and myself,
	And brought in matter that should feed this fire;
	And now 'tis far too huge to be blown out
	With that same weak wind which enkindled it.
	You taught me how to know the face of right,
	Acquainted me with interest to this land,
	Yea, thrust this enterprise into my heart;
	And come ye now to tell me John hath made
	His peace with Rome? What is that peace to me?
	I, by the honour of my marriage-bed,
	After young Arthur, claim this land for mine;
	And, now it is half-conquer'd, must I back
	Because that John hath made his peace with Rome?
	Am I Rome's slave? What penny hath Rome borne,
	What men provided, what munition sent,
	To underprop this action? Is't not I
	That undergo this charge? who else but I,
	And such as to my claim are liable,
	Sweat in this business and maintain this war?
	Have I not heard these islanders shout out
	'Vive le roi!' as I have bank'd their towns?
	Have I not here the best cards for the game,
	To win this easy match play'd for a crown?
	And shall I now give o'er the yielded set?
	No, no, on my soul, it never shall be said.

CARDINAL PANDULPH	You look but on the outside of this work.

LEWIS	Outside or inside, I will not return
	Till my attempt so much be glorified
	As to my ample hope was promised
	Before I drew this gallant head of war,
	And cull'd these fiery spirits from the world,
	To outlook conquest and to win renown
	Even in the jaws of danger and of death.

	[Trumpet sounds]

	What lusty trumpet thus doth summon us?

	[Enter the BASTARD, attended]

BASTARD	According to the fair play of the world,
	Let me have audience; I am sent to speak:
	My holy lord of Milan, from the king
	I come, to learn how you have dealt for him;
	And, as you answer, I do know the scope
	And warrant limited unto my tongue.

CARDINAL PANDULPH	The Dauphin is too wilful-opposite,
	And will not temporize with my entreaties;
	He flatly says he'll not lay down his arms.

BASTARD	By all the blood that ever fury breathed,
	The youth says well. Now hear our English king;
	For thus his royalty doth speak in me.
	He is prepared, and reason too he should:
	This apish and unmannerly approach,
	This harness'd masque and unadvised revel,
	This unhair'd sauciness and boyish troops,
	The king doth smile at; and is well prepared
	To whip this dwarfish war, these pigmy arms,
	From out the circle of his territories.
	That hand which had the strength, even at your door,
	To cudgel you and make you take the hatch,
	To dive like buckets in concealed wells,
	To crouch in litter of your stable planks,
	To lie like pawns lock'd up in chests and trunks,
	To hug with swine, to seek sweet safety out
	In vaults and prisons, and to thrill and shake
	Even at the crying of your nation's crow,
	Thinking his voice an armed Englishman;
	Shall that victorious hand be feebled here,
	That in your chambers gave you chastisement?
	No: know the gallant monarch is in arms
	And like an eagle o'er his aery towers,
	To souse annoyance that comes near his nest.
	And you degenerate, you ingrate revolts,
	You bloody Neroes, ripping up the womb
	Of your dear mother England, blush for shame;
	For your own ladies and pale-visaged maids
	Like Amazons come tripping after drums,
	Their thimbles into armed gauntlets change,
	Their needles to lances, and their gentle hearts
	To fierce and bloody inclination.

LEWIS	There end thy brave, and turn thy face in peace;
	We grant thou canst outscold us: fare thee well;
	We hold our time too precious to be spent
	With such a brabbler.

CARDINAL PANDULPH	Give me leave to speak.

BASTARD	No, I will speak.

LEWIS	                  We will attend to neither.
	Strike up the drums; and let the tongue of war
	Plead for our interest and our being here.

BASTARD	Indeed your drums, being beaten, will cry out;
	And so shall you, being beaten: do but start
	An echo with the clamour of thy drum,
	And even at hand a drum is ready braced
	That shall reverberate all as loud as thine;
	Sound but another, and another shall
	As loud as thine rattle the welkin's ear
	And mock the deep-mouth'd thunder: for at hand,
	Not trusting to this halting legate here,
	Whom he hath used rather for sport than need
	Is warlike John; and in his forehead sits
	A bare-ribb'd death, whose office is this day
	To feast upon whole thousands of the French.

LEWIS	Strike up our drums, to find this danger out.

BASTARD	And thou shalt find it, Dauphin, do not doubt.

	[Exeunt]




	KING JOHN


ACT V



SCENE III	The field of battle.


	[Alarums. Enter KING JOHN and HUBERT]

KING JOHN	How goes the day with us? O, tell me, Hubert.

HUBERT	Badly, I fear. How fares your majesty?

KING JOHN	This fever, that hath troubled me so long,
	Lies heavy on me; O, my heart is sick!

	[Enter a Messenger]

Messenger	My lord, your valiant kinsman, Faulconbridge,
	Desires your majesty to leave the field
	And send him word by me which way you go.

KING JOHN	Tell him, toward Swinstead, to the abbey there.

Messenger	Be of good comfort; for the great supply
	That was expected by the Dauphin here,
	Are wreck'd three nights ago on Goodwin Sands.
	This news was brought to Richard but even now:
	The French fight coldly, and retire themselves.

KING JOHN	Ay me! this tyrant fever burns me up,
	And will not let me welcome this good news.
	Set on toward Swinstead: to my litter straight;
	Weakness possesseth me, and I am faint.

	[Exeunt]




	KING JOHN


ACT V



SCENE IV	Another part of the field.


	[Enter SALISBURY, PEMBROKE, and BIGOT]

SALISBURY	I did not think the king so stored with friends.

PEMBROKE	Up once again; put spirit in the French:
	If they miscarry, we miscarry too.

SALISBURY	That misbegotten devil, Faulconbridge,
	In spite of spite, alone upholds the day.

PEMBROKE	They say King John sore sick hath left the field.

	[Enter MELUN, wounded]

MELUN	Lead me to the revolts of England here.

SALISBURY	When we were happy we had other names.

PEMBROKE	It is the Count Melun.

SALISBURY	Wounded to death.

MELUN	Fly, noble English, you are bought and sold;
	Unthread the rude eye of rebellion
	And welcome home again discarded faith.
	Seek out King John and fall before his feet;
	For if the French be lords of this loud day,
	He means to recompense the pains you take
	By cutting off your heads: thus hath he sworn
	And I with him, and many moe with me,
	Upon the altar at Saint Edmundsbury;
	Even on that altar where we swore to you
	Dear amity and everlasting love.

SALISBURY	May this be possible? may this be true?

MELUN	Have I not hideous death within my view,
	Retaining but a quantity of life,
	Which bleeds away, even as a form of wax
	Resolveth from his figure 'gainst the fire?
	What in the world should make me now deceive,
	Since I must lose the use of all deceit?
	Why should I then be false, since it is true
	That I must die here and live hence by truth?
	I say again, if Lewis do win the day,
	He is forsworn, if e'er those eyes of yours
	Behold another day break in the east:
	But even this night, whose black contagious breath
	Already smokes about the burning crest
	Of the old, feeble and day-wearied sun,
	Even this ill night, your breathing shall expire,
	Paying the fine of rated treachery
	Even with a treacherous fine of all your lives,
	If Lewis by your assistance win the day.
	Commend me to one Hubert with your king:
	The love of him, and this respect besides,
	For that my grandsire was an Englishman,
	Awakes my conscience to confess all this.
	In lieu whereof, I pray you, bear me hence
	From forth the noise and rumour of the field,
	Where I may think the remnant of my thoughts
	In peace, and part this body and my soul
	With contemplation and devout desires.

SALISBURY	We do believe thee: and beshrew my soul
	But I do love the favour and the form
	Of this most fair occasion, by the which
	We will untread the steps of damned flight,
	And like a bated and retired flood,
	Leaving our rankness and irregular course,
	Stoop low within those bounds we have o'erlook'd
	And cabby run on in obedience
	Even to our ocean, to our great King John.
	My arm shall give thee help to bear thee hence;
	For I do see the cruel pangs of death
	Right in thine eye. Away, my friends! New flight;
	And happy newness, that intends old right.

	[Exeunt, leading off MELUN]




	KING JOHN


ACT V



SCENE V	The French camp.


	[Enter LEWIS and his train]

LEWIS	The sun of heaven methought was loath to set,
	But stay'd and made the western welkin blush,
	When English measure backward their own ground
	In faint retire. O, bravely came we off,
	When with a volley of our needless shot,
	After such bloody toil, we bid good night;
	And wound our tattering colours clearly up,
	Last in the field, and almost lords of it!

	[Enter a Messenger]

Messenger	Where is my prince, the Dauphin?

LEWIS	Here: what news?

Messenger	The Count Melun is slain; the English lords
	By his persuasion are again fall'n off,
	And your supply, which you have wish'd so long,
	Are cast away and sunk on Goodwin Sands.

LEWIS	Ah, foul shrewd news! beshrew thy very heart!
	I did not think to be so sad to-night
	As this hath made me. Who was he that said
	King John did fly an hour or two before
	The stumbling night did part our weary powers?

Messenger	Whoever spoke it, it is true, my lord.

LEWIS	Well; keep good quarter and good care to-night:
	The day shall not be up so soon as I,
	To try the fair adventure of to-morrow.

	[Exeunt]




	KING JOHN


ACT V



SCENE VI	An open place in the neighbourhood of Swinstead Abbey.


	[Enter the BASTARD and HUBERT, severally]

HUBERT	Who's there? speak, ho! speak quickly, or I shoot.

BASTARD	A friend. What art thou?

HUBERT	Of the part of England.

BASTARD	Whither dost thou go?

HUBERT	What's that to thee? why may not I demand
	Of thine affairs, as well as thou of mine?

BASTARD	Hubert, I think?

HUBERT	                  Thou hast a perfect thought:
	I will upon all hazards well believe
	Thou art my friend, that know'st my tongue so well.
	Who art thou?

BASTARD	                  Who thou wilt: and if thou please,
	Thou mayst befriend me so much as to think
	I come one way of the Plantagenets.

HUBERT	Unkind remembrance! thou and eyeless night
	Have done me shame: brave soldier, pardon me,
	That any accent breaking from thy tongue
	Should 'scape the true acquaintance of mine ear.

BASTARD	Come, come; sans compliment, what news abroad?

HUBERT	Why, here walk I in the black brow of night,
	To find you out.

BASTARD	                  Brief, then; and what's the news?

HUBERT	O, my sweet sir, news fitting to the night,
	Black, fearful, comfortless and horrible.

BASTARD	Show me the very wound of this ill news:
	I am no woman, I'll not swoon at it.

HUBERT	The king, I fear, is poison'd by a monk:
	I left him almost speechless; and broke out
	To acquaint you with this evil, that you might
	The better arm you to the sudden time,
	Than if you had at leisure known of this.

BASTARD	How did he take it? who did taste to him?

HUBERT	A monk, I tell you; a resolved villain,
	Whose bowels suddenly burst out: the king
	Yet speaks and peradventure may recover.

BASTARD	Who didst thou leave to tend his majesty?

HUBERT	Why, know you not? the lords are all come back,
	And brought Prince Henry in their company;
	At whose request the king hath pardon'd them,
	And they are all about his majesty.

BASTARD	Withhold thine indignation, mighty heaven,
	And tempt us not to bear above our power!
	I'll tell tree, Hubert, half my power this night,
	Passing these flats, are taken by the tide;
	These Lincoln Washes have devoured them;
	Myself, well mounted, hardly have escaped.
	Away before: conduct me to the king;
	I doubt he will be dead or ere I come.

	[Exeunt]




	KING JOHN


ACT V



SCENE VII	The orchard in Swinstead Abbey.


	[Enter PRINCE HENRY, SALISBURY, and BIGOT]

PRINCE HENRY	It is too late: the life of all his blood
	Is touch'd corruptibly, and his pure brain,
	Which some suppose the soul's frail dwelling-house,
	Doth by the idle comments that it makes
	Foretell the ending of mortality.

	[Enter PEMBROKE]

PEMBROKE	His highness yet doth speak, and holds belief
	That, being brought into the open air,
	It would allay the burning quality
	Of that fell poison which assaileth him.

PRINCE HENRY	Let him be brought into the orchard here.
	Doth he still rage?

	[Exit BIGOT]

PEMBROKE	He is more patient
	Than when you left him; even now he sung.

PRINCE HENRY	O vanity of sickness! fierce extremes
	In their continuance will not feel themselves.
	Death, having prey'd upon the outward parts,
	Leaves them invisible, and his siege is now
	Against the mind, the which he pricks and wounds
	With many legions of strange fantasies,
	Which, in their throng and press to that last hold,
	Confound themselves. 'Tis strange that death
	should sing.
	I am the cygnet to this pale faint swan,
	Who chants a doleful hymn to his own death,
	And from the organ-pipe of frailty sings
	His soul and body to their lasting rest.

SALISBURY	Be of good comfort, prince; for you are born
	To set a form upon that indigest
	Which he hath left so shapeless and so rude.

	[Enter Attendants, and BIGOT, carrying KING JOHN in a chair]

KING JOHN	Ay, marry, now my soul hath elbow-room;
	It would not out at windows nor at doors.
	There is so hot a summer in my bosom,
	That all my bowels crumble up to dust:
	I am a scribbled form, drawn with a pen
	Upon a parchment, and against this fire
	Do I shrink up.

PRINCE HENRY	                  How fares your majesty?

KING JOHN	Poison'd,--ill fare--dead, forsook, cast off:
	And none of you will bid the winter come
	To thrust his icy fingers in my maw,
	Nor let my kingdom's rivers take their course
	Through my burn'd bosom, nor entreat the north
	To make his bleak winds kiss my parched lips
	And comfort me with cold. I do not ask you much,
	I beg cold comfort; and you are so strait
	And so ingrateful, you deny me that.

PRINCE HENRY	O that there were some virtue in my tears,
	That might relieve you!

KING JOHN	The salt in them is hot.
	Within me is a hell; and there the poison
	Is as a fiend confined to tyrannize
	On unreprievable condemned blood.

	[Enter the BASTARD]

BASTARD	O, I am scalded with my violent motion,
	And spleen of speed to see your majesty!

KING JOHN	O cousin, thou art come to set mine eye:
	The tackle of my heart is crack'd and burn'd,
	And all the shrouds wherewith my life should sail
	Are turned to one thread, one little hair:
	My heart hath one poor string to stay it by,
	Which holds but till thy news be uttered;
	And then all this thou seest is but a clod
	And module of confounded royalty.

BASTARD	The Dauphin is preparing hitherward,
	Where heaven He knows how we shall answer him;
	For in a night the best part of my power,
	As I upon advantage did remove,
	Were in the Washes all unwarily
	Devoured by the unexpected flood.

	[KING JOHN dies]

SALISBURY	You breathe these dead news in as dead an ear.
	My liege! my lord! but now a king, now thus.

PRINCE HENRY	Even so must I run on, and even so stop.
	What surety of the world, what hope, what stay,
	When this was now a king, and now is clay?

BASTARD	Art thou gone so? I do but stay behind
	To do the office for thee of revenge,
	And then my soul shall wait on thee to heaven,
	As it on earth hath been thy servant still.
	Now, now, you stars that move in your right spheres,
	Where be your powers? show now your mended faiths,
	And instantly return with me again,
	To push destruction and perpetual shame
	Out of the weak door of our fainting land.
	Straight let us seek, or straight we shall be sought;
	The Dauphin rages at our very heels.

SALISBURY	It seems you know not, then, so much as we:
	The Cardinal Pandulph is within at rest,
	Who half an hour since came from the Dauphin,
	And brings from him such offers of our peace
	As we with honour and respect may take,
	With purpose presently to leave this war.

BASTARD	He will the rather do it when he sees
	Ourselves well sinewed to our defence.

SALISBURY	Nay, it is in a manner done already;
	For many carriages he hath dispatch'd
	To the sea-side, and put his cause and quarrel
	To the disposing of the cardinal:
	With whom yourself, myself and other lords,
	If you think meet, this afternoon will post
	To consummate this business happily.

BASTARD	Let it be so: and you, my noble prince,
	With other princes that may best be spared,
	Shall wait upon your father's funeral.

PRINCE HENRY	At Worcester must his body be interr'd;
	For so he will'd it.

BASTARD	Thither shall it then:
	And happily may your sweet self put on
	The lineal state and glory of the land!
	To whom with all submission, on my knee
	I do bequeath my faithful services
	And true subjection everlastingly.

SALISBURY	And the like tender of our love we make,
	To rest without a spot for evermore.

PRINCE HENRY	I have a kind soul that would give you thanks
	And knows not how to do it but with tears.

BASTARD	O, let us pay the time but needful woe,
	Since it hath been beforehand with our griefs.
	This England never did, nor never shall,
	Lie at the proud foot of a conqueror,
	But when it first did help to wound itself.
	Now these her princes are come home again,
	Come the three corners of the world in arms,
	And we shall shock them. Nought shall make us rue,
	If England to itself do rest but true.

	[Exeunt]


	THE MERRY WIVES OF WINDSOR


	DRAMATIS PERSONAE


SIR JOHN FALSTAFF	(FALSTAFF:)

FENTON	a gentleman.

SHALLOW	a country justice.

SLENDER	cousin to Shallow.


FORD	|
	|  two gentlemen dwelling at Windsor.
PAGE	|


WILLIAM PAGE	a boy, son to Page.

SIR HUGH EVANS	a Welsh parson.

DOCTOR CAIUS	a French physician.

	Host of the Garter Inn. (Host:)


BARDOLPH	|
	|
PISTOL	|  sharpers attending on Falstaff.
	|
NYM	|


ROBIN	page to Falstaff.

SIMPLE	servant to Slender.

RUGBY	servant to Doctor Caius.

MISTRESS FORD:

MISTRESS PAGE:

ANNE PAGE	her daughter.

MISTRESS QUICKLY	servant to Doctor Caius.

	Servants to Page, Ford, &c.
	(Servant:)
	(First Servant:)
	(Second Servant:)


SCENE	Windsor, and the neighbourhood.




	THE MERRY WIVES OF WINDSOR


ACT I



SCENE I	Windsor. Before PAGE's house.


	[Enter SHALLOW, SLENDER, and SIR HUGH EVANS]

SHALLOW	Sir Hugh, persuade me not; I will make a Star-
	chamber matter of it: if he were twenty Sir John
	Falstaffs, he shall not abuse Robert Shallow, esquire.

SLENDER	In the county of Gloucester, justice of peace and
	'Coram.'

SHALLOW	Ay, cousin Slender, and 'Custalourum.

SLENDER	Ay, and 'Rato-lorum' too; and a gentleman born,
	master parson; who writes himself 'Armigero,' in any
	bill, warrant, quittance, or obligation, 'Armigero.'

SHALLOW	Ay, that I do; and have done any time these three
	hundred years.

SLENDER	All his successors gone before him hath done't; and
	all his ancestors that come after him may: they may
	give the dozen white luces in their coat.

SHALLOW	It is an old coat.

SIR HUGH EVANS	The dozen white louses do become an old coat well;
	it agrees well, passant; it is a familiar beast to
	man, and signifies love.

SHALLOW	The luce is the fresh fish; the salt fish is an old coat.

SLENDER	I may quarter, coz.

SHALLOW	You may, by marrying.

SIR HUGH EVANS	It is marring indeed, if he quarter it.

SHALLOW	Not a whit.

SIR HUGH EVANS	Yes, py'r lady; if he has a quarter of your coat,
	there is but three skirts for yourself, in my
	simple conjectures: but that is all one. If Sir
	John Falstaff have committed disparagements unto
	you, I am of the church, and will be glad to do my
	benevolence to make atonements and compremises
	between you.

SHALLOW	The council shall bear it; it is a riot.

SIR HUGH EVANS	It is not meet the council hear a riot; there is no
	fear of Got in a riot: the council, look you, shall
	desire to hear the fear of Got, and not to hear a
	riot; take your vizaments in that.

SHALLOW	Ha! o' my life, if I were young again, the sword
	should end it.

SIR HUGH EVANS	It is petter that friends is the sword, and end it:
	and there is also another device in my prain, which
	peradventure prings goot discretions with it: there
	is Anne Page, which is daughter to Master Thomas
	Page, which is pretty virginity.

SLENDER	Mistress Anne Page? She has brown hair, and speaks
	small like a woman.

SIR HUGH EVANS	It is that fery person for all the orld, as just as
	you will desire; and seven hundred pounds of moneys,
	and gold and silver, is her grandsire upon his
	death's-bed--Got deliver to a joyful resurrections!
	--give, when she is able to overtake seventeen years
	old: it were a goot motion if we leave our pribbles
	and prabbles, and desire a marriage between Master
	Abraham and Mistress Anne Page.

SLENDER	Did her grandsire leave her seven hundred pound?

SIR HUGH EVANS	Ay, and her father is make her a petter penny.

SLENDER	I know the young gentlewoman; she has good gifts.

SIR HUGH EVANS	Seven hundred pounds and possibilities is goot gifts.

SHALLOW	Well, let us see honest Master Page. Is Falstaff there?

SIR HUGH EVANS	Shall I tell you a lie? I do despise a liar as I do
	despise one that is false, or as I despise one that
	is not true. The knight, Sir John, is there; and, I
	beseech you, be ruled by your well-willers. I will
	peat the door for Master Page.

	[Knocks]

	What, hoa! Got pless your house here!

PAGE	[Within]  Who's there?

	[Enter PAGE]

SIR HUGH EVANS	Here is Got's plessing, and your friend, and Justice
	Shallow; and here young Master Slender, that
	peradventures shall tell you another tale, if
	matters grow to your likings.

PAGE	I am glad to see your worships well.
	I thank you for my venison, Master Shallow.

SHALLOW	Master Page, I am glad to see you: much good do it
	your good heart! I wished your venison better; it
	was ill killed. How doth good Mistress Page?--and I
	thank you always with my heart, la! with my heart.

PAGE	Sir, I thank you.

SHALLOW	Sir, I thank you; by yea and no, I do.

PAGE	I am glad to see you, good Master Slender.

SLENDER	How does your fallow greyhound, sir? I heard say he
	was outrun on Cotsall.

PAGE	It could not be judged, sir.

SLENDER	You'll not confess, you'll not confess.

SHALLOW	That he will not. 'Tis your fault, 'tis your fault;
	'tis a good dog.

PAGE	A cur, sir.

SHALLOW	Sir, he's a good dog, and a fair dog: can there be
	more said? he is good and fair. Is Sir John
	Falstaff here?

PAGE	Sir, he is within; and I would I could do a good
	office between you.

SIR HUGH EVANS	It is spoke as a Christians ought to speak.

SHALLOW	He hath wronged me, Master Page.

PAGE	Sir, he doth in some sort confess it.

SHALLOW	If it be confessed, it is not redress'd: is not that
	so, Master Page? He hath wronged me; indeed he
	hath, at a word, he hath, believe me: Robert
	Shallow, esquire, saith, he is wronged.

PAGE	Here comes Sir John.

	[Enter FALSTAFF, BARDOLPH, NYM, and PISTOL]

FALSTAFF	Now, Master Shallow, you'll complain of me to the king?

SHALLOW	Knight, you have beaten my men, killed my deer, and
	broke open my lodge.

FALSTAFF	But not kissed your keeper's daughter?

SHALLOW	Tut, a pin! this shall be answered.

FALSTAFF	I will answer it straight; I have done all this.
	That is now answered.

SHALLOW	The council shall know this.

FALSTAFF	'Twere better for you if it were known in counsel:
	you'll be laughed at.

SIR HUGH EVANS	Pauca verba, Sir John; goot worts.

FALSTAFF	Good worts! good cabbage. Slender, I broke your
	head: what matter have you against me?

SLENDER	Marry, sir, I have matter in my head against you;
	and against your cony-catching rascals, Bardolph,
	Nym, and Pistol.

BARDOLPH	You Banbury cheese!

SLENDER	Ay, it is no matter.

PISTOL	How now, Mephostophilus!

SLENDER	Ay, it is no matter.

NYM	Slice, I say! pauca, pauca: slice! that's my humour.

SLENDER	Where's Simple, my man? Can you tell, cousin?

SIR HUGH EVANS	Peace, I pray you. Now let us understand. There is
	three umpires in this matter, as I understand; that
	is, Master Page, fidelicet Master Page; and there is
	myself, fidelicet myself; and the three party is,
	lastly and finally, mine host of the Garter.

PAGE	We three, to hear it and end it between them.

SIR HUGH EVANS	Fery goot: I will make a prief of it in my note-
	book; and we will afterwards ork upon the cause with
	as great discreetly as we can.

FALSTAFF	Pistol!

PISTOL	He hears with ears.

SIR HUGH EVANS	The tevil and his tam! what phrase is this, 'He
	hears with ear'? why, it is affectations.

FALSTAFF	Pistol, did you pick Master Slender's purse?

SLENDER	Ay, by these gloves, did he, or I would I might
	never come in mine own great chamber again else, of
	seven groats in mill-sixpences, and two Edward
	shovel-boards, that cost me two shilling and two
	pence apiece of Yead Miller, by these gloves.

FALSTAFF	Is this true, Pistol?

SIR HUGH EVANS	No; it is false, if it is a pick-purse.

PISTOL	Ha, thou mountain-foreigner! Sir John and Master mine,
	I combat challenge of this latten bilbo.
	Word of denial in thy labras here!
	Word of denial: froth and scum, thou liest!

SLENDER	By these gloves, then, 'twas he.

NYM	Be avised, sir, and pass good humours: I will say
	'marry trap' with you, if you run the nuthook's
	humour on me; that is the very note of it.

SLENDER	By this hat, then, he in the red face had it; for
	though I cannot remember what I did when you made me
	drunk, yet I am not altogether an ass.

FALSTAFF	What say you, Scarlet and John?

BARDOLPH	Why, sir, for my part I say the gentleman had drunk
	himself out of his five sentences.

SIR HUGH EVANS	It is his five senses: fie, what the ignorance is!

BARDOLPH	And being fap, sir, was, as they say, cashiered; and
	so conclusions passed the careires.

SLENDER	Ay, you spake in Latin then too; but 'tis no
	matter: I'll ne'er be drunk whilst I live again,
	but in honest, civil, godly company, for this trick:
	if I be drunk, I'll be drunk with those that have
	the fear of God, and not with drunken knaves.

SIR HUGH EVANS	So Got udge me, that is a virtuous mind.

FALSTAFF	You hear all these matters denied, gentlemen; you hear it.

	[Enter ANNE PAGE, with wine; MISTRESS FORD
	and MISTRESS PAGE, following]

PAGE	Nay, daughter, carry the wine in; we'll drink within.

	[Exit ANNE PAGE]

SLENDER	O heaven! this is Mistress Anne Page.

PAGE	How now, Mistress Ford!

FALSTAFF	Mistress Ford, by my troth, you are very well met:
	by your leave, good mistress.

	[Kisses her]

PAGE	Wife, bid these gentlemen welcome. Come, we have a
	hot venison pasty to dinner: come, gentlemen, I hope
	we shall drink down all unkindness.

	[Exeunt all except SHALLOW, SLENDER, and SIR HUGH EVANS]

SLENDER	I had rather than forty shillings I had my Book of
	Songs and Sonnets here.

	[Enter SIMPLE]

	How now, Simple! where have you been? I must wait
	on myself, must I? You have not the Book of Riddles
	about you, have you?

SIMPLE	Book of Riddles! why, did you not lend it to Alice
	Shortcake upon All-hallowmas last, a fortnight
	afore Michaelmas?

SHALLOW	Come, coz; come, coz; we stay for you. A word with
	you, coz; marry, this, coz: there is, as 'twere, a
	tender, a kind of tender, made afar off by Sir Hugh
	here. Do you understand me?

SLENDER	Ay, sir, you shall find me reasonable; if it be so,
	I shall do that that is reason.

SHALLOW	Nay, but understand me.

SLENDER	So I do, sir.

SIR HUGH EVANS	Give ear to his motions, Master Slender: I will
	description the matter to you, if you be capacity of it.

SLENDER	Nay, I will do as my cousin Shallow says: I pray
	you, pardon me; he's a justice of peace in his
	country, simple though I stand here.

SIR HUGH EVANS	But that is not the question: the question is
	concerning your marriage.

SHALLOW	Ay, there's the point, sir.

SIR HUGH EVANS	Marry, is it; the very point of it; to Mistress Anne Page.

SLENDER	Why, if it be so, I will marry her upon any
	reasonable demands.

SIR HUGH EVANS	But can you affection the 'oman? Let us command to
	know that of your mouth or of your lips; for divers
	philosophers hold that the lips is parcel of the
	mouth. Therefore, precisely, can you carry your
	good will to the maid?

SHALLOW	Cousin Abraham Slender, can you love her?

SLENDER	I hope, sir, I will do as it shall become one that
	would do reason.

SIR HUGH EVANS	Nay, Got's lords and his ladies! you must speak
	possitable, if you can carry her your desires
	towards her.

SHALLOW	That you must. Will you, upon good dowry, marry her?

SLENDER	I will do a greater thing than that, upon your
	request, cousin, in any reason.

SHALLOW	Nay, conceive me, conceive me, sweet coz: what I do
	is to pleasure you, coz. Can you love the maid?

SLENDER	I will marry her, sir, at your request: but if there
	be no great love in the beginning, yet heaven may
	decrease it upon better acquaintance, when we are
	married and have more occasion to know one another;
	I hope, upon familiarity will grow more contempt:
	but if you say, 'Marry her,' I will marry her; that
	I am freely dissolved, and dissolutely.

SIR HUGH EVANS	It is a fery discretion answer; save the fall is in
	the ort 'dissolutely:' the ort is, according to our
	meaning, 'resolutely:' his meaning is good.

SHALLOW	Ay, I think my cousin meant well.

SLENDER	Ay, or else I would I might be hanged, la!

SHALLOW	Here comes fair Mistress Anne.

	[Re-enter ANNE PAGE]

	Would I were young for your sake, Mistress Anne!

ANNE PAGE	The dinner is on the table; my father desires your
	worships' company.

SHALLOW	I will wait on him, fair Mistress Anne.

SIR HUGH EVANS	Od's plessed will! I will not be absence at the grace.

	[Exeunt SHALLOW and SIR HUGH EVANS]

ANNE PAGE	Will't please your worship to come in, sir?

SLENDER	No, I thank you, forsooth, heartily; I am very well.

ANNE PAGE	The dinner attends you, sir.

SLENDER	I am not a-hungry, I thank you, forsooth. Go,
	sirrah, for all you are my man, go wait upon my
	cousin Shallow.

	[Exit SIMPLE]

	A justice of peace sometimes may be beholding to his
	friend for a man. I keep but three men and a boy
	yet, till my mother be dead: but what though? Yet I
	live like a poor gentleman born.

ANNE PAGE	I may not go in without your worship: they will not
	sit till you come.

SLENDER	I' faith, I'll eat nothing; I thank you as much as
	though I did.

ANNE PAGE	I pray you, sir, walk in.

SLENDER	I had rather walk here, I thank you. I bruised
	my shin th' other day with playing at sword and
	dagger with a master of fence; three veneys for a
	dish of stewed prunes; and, by my troth, I cannot
	abide the smell of hot meat since. Why do your
	dogs bark so? be there bears i' the town?

ANNE PAGE	I think there are, sir; I heard them talked of.

SLENDER	I love the sport well but I shall as soon quarrel at
	it as any man in England. You are afraid, if you see
	the bear loose, are you not?

ANNE PAGE	Ay, indeed, sir.

SLENDER	That's meat and drink to me, now. I have seen
	Sackerson loose twenty times, and have taken him by
	the chain; but, I warrant you, the women have so
	cried and shrieked at it, that it passed: but women,
	indeed, cannot abide 'em; they are very ill-favored
	rough things.

	[Re-enter PAGE]

PAGE	Come, gentle Master Slender, come; we stay for you.

SLENDER	I'll eat nothing, I thank you, sir.

PAGE	By cock and pie, you shall not choose, sir! come, come.

SLENDER	Nay, pray you, lead the way.

PAGE	Come on, sir.

SLENDER	Mistress Anne, yourself shall go first.

ANNE PAGE	Not I, sir; pray you, keep on.

SLENDER	I'll rather be unmannerly than troublesome.
	You do yourself wrong, indeed, la!

	[Exeunt]




	THE MERRY WIVES OF WINDSOR


ACT I



SCENE II	The same.


	[Enter SIR HUGH EVANS and SIMPLE]

SIR HUGH EVANS	Go your ways, and ask of Doctor Caius' house which
	is the way: and there dwells one Mistress Quickly,
	which is in the manner of his nurse, or his dry
	nurse, or his cook, or his laundry, his washer, and
	his wringer.

SIMPLE	Well, sir.

SIR HUGH EVANS	Nay, it is petter yet. Give her this letter; for it
	is a 'oman that altogether's acquaintance with
	Mistress Anne Page: and the letter is, to desire
	and require her to solicit your master's desires to
	Mistress Anne Page. I pray you, be gone: I will
	make an end of my dinner; there's pippins and cheese to come.

	[Exeunt]




	THE MERRY WIVES OF WINDSOR


ACT I



SCENE III	A room in the Garter Inn.


	[Enter FALSTAFF, Host, BARDOLPH, NYM, PISTOL,
	and ROBIN]

FALSTAFF	Mine host of the Garter!

Host	What says my bully-rook? speak scholarly and wisely.

FALSTAFF	Truly, mine host, I must turn away some of my
	followers.

Host	Discard, bully Hercules; cashier: let them wag; trot, trot.

FALSTAFF	I sit at ten pounds a week.

Host	Thou'rt an emperor, Caesar, Keisar, and Pheezar. I
	will entertain Bardolph; he shall draw, he shall
	tap: said I well, bully Hector?

FALSTAFF	Do so, good mine host.

Host	I have spoke; let him follow.

	[To BARDOLPH]

	Let me see thee froth and lime: I am at a word; follow.

	[Exit]

FALSTAFF	Bardolph, follow him. A tapster is a good trade:
	an old cloak makes a new jerkin; a withered
	serving-man a fresh tapster. Go; adieu.

BARDOLPH	It is a life that I have desired: I will thrive.

PISTOL	O base Hungarian wight! wilt thou the spigot wield?

	[Exit BARDOLPH]

NYM	He was gotten in drink: is not the humour conceited?

FALSTAFF	I am glad I am so acquit of this tinderbox: his
	thefts were too open; his filching was like an
	unskilful singer; he kept not time.

NYM	The good humour is to steal at a minute's rest.

PISTOL	'Convey,' the wise it call. 'Steal!' foh! a fico
	for the phrase!

FALSTAFF	Well, sirs, I am almost out at heels.

PISTOL	Why, then, let kibes ensue.

FALSTAFF	There is no remedy; I must cony-catch; I must shift.

PISTOL	Young ravens must have food.

FALSTAFF	Which of you know Ford of this town?

PISTOL	I ken the wight: he is of substance good.

FALSTAFF	My honest lads, I will tell you what I am about.

PISTOL	Two yards, and more.

FALSTAFF	No quips now, Pistol! Indeed, I am in the waist two
	yards about; but I am now about no waste; I am about
	thrift. Briefly, I do mean to make love to Ford's
	wife: I spy entertainment in her; she discourses,
	she carves, she gives the leer of invitation: I
	can construe the action of her familiar style; and
	the hardest voice of her behavior, to be Englished
	rightly, is, 'I am Sir John Falstaff's.'

PISTOL	He hath studied her will, and translated her will,
	out of honesty into English.

NYM	The anchor is deep: will that humour pass?

FALSTAFF	Now, the report goes she has all the rule of her
	husband's purse: he hath a legion of angels.

PISTOL	As many devils entertain; and 'To her, boy,' say I.

NYM	The humour rises; it is good: humour me the angels.

FALSTAFF	I have writ me here a letter to her: and here
	another to Page's wife, who even now gave me good
	eyes too, examined my parts with most judicious
	oeillades; sometimes the beam of her view gilded my
	foot, sometimes my portly belly.

PISTOL	Then did the sun on dunghill shine.

NYM	I thank thee for that humour.

FALSTAFF	O, she did so course o'er my exteriors with such a
	greedy intention, that the appetite of her eye did
	seem to scorch me up like a burning-glass! Here's
	another letter to her: she bears the purse too; she
	is a region in Guiana, all gold and bounty. I will
	be cheater to them both, and they shall be
	exchequers to me; they shall be my East and West
	Indies, and I will trade to them both. Go bear thou
	this letter to Mistress Page; and thou this to
	Mistress Ford: we will thrive, lads, we will thrive.

PISTOL	Shall I Sir Pandarus of Troy become,
	And by my side wear steel? then, Lucifer take all!

NYM	I will run no base humour: here, take the
	humour-letter: I will keep the havior of reputation.

FALSTAFF	[To ROBIN]  Hold, sirrah, bear you these letters tightly;
	Sail like my pinnace to these golden shores.
	Rogues, hence, avaunt! vanish like hailstones, go;
	Trudge, plod away o' the hoof; seek shelter, pack!
	Falstaff will learn the humour of the age,
	French thrift, you rogues; myself and skirted page.

	[Exeunt FALSTAFF and ROBIN]

PISTOL	Let vultures gripe thy guts! for gourd and fullam holds,
	And high and low beguiles the rich and poor:
	Tester I'll have in pouch when thou shalt lack,
	Base Phrygian Turk!

NYM	I have operations which be humours of revenge.

PISTOL	Wilt thou revenge?

NYM	By welkin and her star!

PISTOL	With wit or steel?

NYM	With both the humours, I:
	I will discuss the humour of this love to Page.

PISTOL	     And I to Ford shall eke unfold
	How Falstaff, varlet vile,
	His dove will prove, his gold will hold,
	And his soft couch defile.

NYM	My humour shall not cool: I will incense Page to
	deal with poison; I will possess him with
	yellowness, for the revolt of mine is dangerous:
	that is my true humour.

PISTOL	Thou art the Mars of malecontents: I second thee; troop on.

	[Exeunt]




	THE MERRY WIVES OF WINDSOR


ACT I



SCENE IV	A room in DOCTOR CAIUS' house.


	[Enter MISTRESS QUICKLY, SIMPLE, and RUGBY]

MISTRESS QUICKLY	What, John Rugby! I pray thee, go to the casement,
	and see if you can see my master, Master Doctor
	Caius, coming. If he do, i' faith, and find any
	body in the house, here will be an old abusing of
	God's patience and the king's English.

RUGBY	I'll go watch.

MISTRESS QUICKLY	Go; and we'll have a posset for't soon at night, in
	faith, at the latter end of a sea-coal fire.

	[Exit RUGBY]

	An honest, willing, kind fellow, as ever servant
	shall come in house withal, and, I warrant you, no
	tell-tale nor no breed-bate: his worst fault is,
	that he is given to prayer; he is something peevish
	that way: but nobody but has his fault; but let
	that pass. Peter Simple, you say your name is?

SIMPLE	Ay, for fault of a better.

MISTRESS QUICKLY	And Master Slender's your master?

SIMPLE	Ay, forsooth.

MISTRESS QUICKLY	Does he not wear a great round beard, like a
	glover's paring-knife?

SIMPLE	No, forsooth: he hath but a little wee face, with a
	little yellow beard, a Cain-coloured beard.

MISTRESS QUICKLY	A softly-sprighted man, is he not?

SIMPLE	Ay, forsooth: but he is as tall a man of his hands
	as any is between this and his head; he hath fought
	with a warrener.

MISTRESS QUICKLY	How say you? O, I should remember him: does he not
	hold up his head, as it were, and strut in his gait?

SIMPLE	Yes, indeed, does he.

MISTRESS QUICKLY	Well, heaven send Anne Page no worse fortune! Tell
	Master Parson Evans I will do what I can for your
	master: Anne is a good girl, and I wish--

	[Re-enter RUGBY]

RUGBY	Out, alas! here comes my master.

MISTRESS QUICKLY	We shall all be shent. Run in here, good young man;
	go into this closet: he will not stay long.

	[Shuts SIMPLE in the closet]

	What, John Rugby! John! what, John, I say!
	Go, John, go inquire for my master; I doubt
	he be not well, that he comes not home.

	[Singing]

	And down, down, adown-a, &c.

	[Enter DOCTOR CAIUS]

DOCTOR CAIUS	Vat is you sing? I do not like des toys. Pray you,
	go and vetch me in my closet un boitier vert, a box,
	a green-a box: do intend vat I speak? a green-a box.

MISTRESS QUICKLY	Ay, forsooth; I'll fetch it you.

	[Aside]

	I am glad he went not in himself: if he had found
	the young man, he would have been horn-mad.

DOCTOR CAIUS	Fe, fe, fe, fe! ma foi, il fait fort chaud. Je
	m'en vais a la cour--la grande affaire.

MISTRESS QUICKLY	Is it this, sir?

DOCTOR CAIUS	Oui; mette le au mon pocket: depeche, quickly. Vere
	is dat knave Rugby?

MISTRESS QUICKLY	What, John Rugby! John!

RUGBY	Here, sir!

DOCTOR CAIUS	You are John Rugby, and you are Jack Rugby. Come,
	take-a your rapier, and come after my heel to the court.

RUGBY	'Tis ready, sir, here in the porch.

DOCTOR CAIUS	By my trot, I tarry too long. Od's me!
	Qu'ai-j'oublie! dere is some simples in my closet,
	dat I vill not for the varld I shall leave behind.

MISTRESS QUICKLY	Ay me, he'll find the young man here, and be mad!

DOCTOR CAIUS	O diable, diable! vat is in my closet? Villain! larron!

	[Pulling SIMPLE out]

	Rugby, my rapier!

MISTRESS QUICKLY	Good master, be content.

DOCTOR CAIUS	Wherefore shall I be content-a?

MISTRESS QUICKLY	The young man is an honest man.

DOCTOR CAIUS	What shall de honest man do in my closet? dere is
	no honest man dat shall come in my closet.

MISTRESS QUICKLY	I beseech you, be not so phlegmatic. Hear the truth
	of it: he came of an errand to me from Parson Hugh.

DOCTOR CAIUS	Vell.

SIMPLE	Ay, forsooth; to desire her to--

MISTRESS QUICKLY	Peace, I pray you.

DOCTOR CAIUS	Peace-a your tongue. Speak-a your tale.

SIMPLE	To desire this honest gentlewoman, your maid, to
	speak a good word to Mistress Anne Page for my
	master in the way of marriage.

MISTRESS QUICKLY	This is all, indeed, la! but I'll ne'er put my
	finger in the fire, and need not.

DOCTOR CAIUS	Sir Hugh send-a you? Rugby, baille me some paper.
	Tarry you a little-a while.

	[Writes]

MISTRESS QUICKLY	[Aside to SIMPLE]  I am glad he is so quiet: if he
	had been thoroughly moved, you should have heard him
	so loud and so melancholy. But notwithstanding,
	man, I'll do you your master what good I can: and
	the very yea and the no is, the French doctor, my
	master,--I may call him my master, look you, for I
	keep his house; and I wash, wring, brew, bake,
	scour, dress meat and drink, make the beds and do
	all myself,--

SIMPLE	[Aside to MISTRESS QUICKLY]  'Tis a great charge to
	come under one body's hand.

MISTRESS QUICKLY	[Aside to SIMPLE]  Are you avised o' that? you
	shall find it a great charge: and to be up early
	and down late; but notwithstanding,--to tell you in
	your ear; I would have no words of it,--my master
	himself is in love with Mistress Anne Page: but
	notwithstanding that, I know Anne's mind,--that's
	neither here nor there.

DOCTOR CAIUS	You jack'nape, give-a this letter to Sir Hugh; by
	gar, it is a shallenge: I will cut his troat in dee
	park; and I will teach a scurvy jack-a-nape priest
	to meddle or make. You may be gone; it is not good
	you tarry here. By gar, I will cut all his two
	stones; by gar, he shall not have a stone to throw
	at his dog:

	[Exit SIMPLE]

MISTRESS QUICKLY	Alas, he speaks but for his friend.

DOCTOR CAIUS	It is no matter-a ver dat: do not you tell-a me
	dat I shall have Anne Page for myself? By gar, I
	vill kill de Jack priest; and I have appointed mine
	host of de Jarteer to measure our weapon. By gar, I
	will myself have Anne Page.

MISTRESS QUICKLY	Sir, the maid loves you, and all shall be well. We
	must give folks leave to prate: what, the good-jer!

DOCTOR CAIUS	Rugby, come to the court with me. By gar, if I have
	not Anne Page, I shall turn your head out of my
	door. Follow my heels, Rugby.

	[Exeunt DOCTOR CAIUS and RUGBY]

MISTRESS QUICKLY	You shall have An fool's-head of your own. No, I
	know Anne's mind for that: never a woman in Windsor
	knows more of Anne's mind than I do; nor can do more
	than I do with her, I thank heaven.

FENTON	[Within]  Who's within there? ho!

MISTRESS QUICKLY	Who's there, I trow! Come near the house, I pray you.

	[Enter FENTON]

FENTON	How now, good woman? how dost thou?

MISTRESS QUICKLY	The better that it pleases your good worship to ask.

FENTON	What news? how does pretty Mistress Anne?

MISTRESS QUICKLY	In truth, sir, and she is pretty, and honest, and
	gentle; and one that is your friend, I can tell you
	that by the way; I praise heaven for it.

FENTON	Shall I do any good, thinkest thou? shall I not lose my suit?

MISTRESS QUICKLY	Troth, sir, all is in his hands above: but
	notwithstanding, Master Fenton, I'll be sworn on a
	book, she loves you. Have not your worship a wart
	above your eye?

FENTON	Yes, marry, have I; what of that?

MISTRESS QUICKLY	Well, thereby hangs a tale: good faith, it is such
	another Nan; but, I detest, an honest maid as ever
	broke bread: we had an hour's talk of that wart. I
	shall never laugh but in that maid's company! But
	indeed she is given too much to allicholy and
	musing: but for you--well, go to.

FENTON	Well, I shall see her to-day. Hold, there's money
	for thee; let me have thy voice in my behalf: if
	thou seest her before me, commend me.

MISTRESS QUICKLY	Will I? i'faith, that we will; and I will tell your
	worship more of the wart the next time we have
	confidence; and of other wooers.

FENTON	Well, farewell; I am in great haste now.

MISTRESS QUICKLY	Farewell to your worship.

	[Exit FENTON]

	Truly, an honest gentleman: but Anne loves him not;
	for I know Anne's mind as well as another does. Out
	upon't! what have I forgot?

	[Exit]




	THE MERRY WIVES OF WINDSOR


ACT II



SCENE I	Before PAGE'S house.


	[Enter MISTRESS PAGE, with a letter]

MISTRESS PAGE	What, have I scaped love-letters in the holiday-
	time of my beauty, and am I now a subject for them?
	Let me see.

	[Reads]

	'Ask me no reason why I love you; for though
	Love use Reason for his physician, he admits him
	not for his counsellor. You are not young, no more
	am I; go to then, there's sympathy: you are merry,
	so am I; ha, ha! then there's more sympathy: you
	love sack, and so do I; would you desire better
	sympathy? Let it suffice thee, Mistress Page,--at
	the least, if the love of soldier can suffice,--
	that I love thee. I will not say, pity me; 'tis
	not a soldier-like phrase: but I say, love me. By me,
	Thine own true knight,
	By day or night,
	Or any kind of light,
	With all his might
	For thee to fight,    JOHN FALSTAFF'
	What a Herod of Jewry is this! O wicked
	world! One that is well-nigh worn to pieces with
	age to show himself a young gallant! What an
	unweighed behavior hath this Flemish drunkard
	picked--with the devil's name!--out of my
	conversation, that he dares in this manner assay me?
	Why, he hath not been thrice in my company! What
	should I say to him? I was then frugal of my
	mirth: Heaven forgive me! Why, I'll exhibit a bill
	in the parliament for the putting down of men. How
	shall I be revenged on him? for revenged I will be,
	as sure as his guts are made of puddings.

	[Enter MISTRESS FORD]

MISTRESS FORD	Mistress Page! trust me, I was going to your house.

MISTRESS PAGE	And, trust me, I was coming to you. You look very
	ill.

MISTRESS FORD	Nay, I'll ne'er believe that; I have to show to the contrary.

MISTRESS PAGE	Faith, but you do, in my mind.

MISTRESS FORD	Well, I do then; yet I say I could show you to the
	contrary. O Mistress Page, give me some counsel!

MISTRESS PAGE	What's the matter, woman?

MISTRESS FORD	O woman, if it were not for one trifling respect, I
	could come to such honour!

MISTRESS PAGE	Hang the trifle, woman! take the honour. What is
	it? dispense with trifles; what is it?

MISTRESS FORD	If I would but go to hell for an eternal moment or so,
	I could be knighted.

MISTRESS PAGE	What? thou liest! Sir Alice Ford! These knights
	will hack; and so thou shouldst not alter the
	article of thy gentry.

MISTRESS FORD	We burn daylight: here, read, read; perceive how I
	might be knighted. I shall think the worse of fat
	men, as long as I have an eye to make difference of
	men's liking: and yet he would not swear; praised
	women's modesty; and gave such orderly and
	well-behaved reproof to all uncomeliness, that I
	would have sworn his disposition would have gone to
	the truth of his words; but they do no more adhere
	and keep place together than the Hundredth Psalm to
	the tune of 'Green Sleeves.' What tempest, I trow,
	threw this whale, with so many tuns of oil in his
	belly, ashore at Windsor? How shall I be revenged
	on him? I think the best way were to entertain him
	with hope, till the wicked fire of lust have melted
	him in his own grease. Did you ever hear the like?

MISTRESS PAGE	Letter for letter, but that the name of Page and
	Ford differs! To thy great comfort in this mystery
	of ill opinions, here's the twin-brother of thy
	letter: but let thine inherit first; for, I
	protest, mine never shall. I warrant he hath a
	thousand of these letters, writ with blank space for
	different names--sure, more,--and these are of the
	second edition: he will print them, out of doubt;
	for he cares not what he puts into the press, when
	he would put us two. I had rather be a giantess,
	and lie under Mount Pelion. Well, I will find you
	twenty lascivious turtles ere one chaste man.

MISTRESS FORD	Why, this is the very same; the very hand, the very
	words. What doth he think of us?

MISTRESS PAGE	Nay, I know not: it makes me almost ready to
	wrangle with mine own honesty. I'll entertain
	myself like one that I am not acquainted withal;
	for, sure, unless he know some strain in me, that I
	know not myself, he would never have boarded me in this fury.

MISTRESS FORD	'Boarding,' call you it? I'll be sure to keep him
	above deck.

MISTRESS PAGE	So will I	if he come under my hatches, I'll never
	to sea again. Let's be revenged on him: let's
	appoint him a meeting; give him a show of comfort in
	his suit and lead him on with a fine-baited delay,
	till he hath pawned his horses to mine host of the Garter.

MISTRESS FORD	Nay, I will consent to act any villany against him,
	that may not sully the chariness of our honesty. O,
	that my husband saw this letter! it would give
	eternal food to his jealousy.

MISTRESS PAGE	Why, look where he comes; and my good man too: he's
	as far from jealousy as I am from giving him cause;
	and that I hope is an unmeasurable distance.

MISTRESS FORD	You are the happier woman.

MISTRESS PAGE	Let's consult together against this greasy knight.
	Come hither.

	[They retire]

	[Enter FORD with PISTOL, and PAGE with NYM]

FORD	Well, I hope it be not so.

PISTOL	Hope is a curtal dog in some affairs:
	Sir John affects thy wife.

FORD	Why, sir, my wife is not young.

PISTOL	He wooes both high and low, both rich and poor,
	Both young and old, one with another, Ford;
	He loves the gallimaufry: Ford, perpend.

FORD	Love my wife!

PISTOL	With liver burning hot. Prevent, or go thou,
	Like Sir Actaeon he, with Ringwood at thy heels:
	O, odious is the name!

FORD	What name, sir?

PISTOL	The horn, I say. Farewell.
	Take heed, have open eye, for thieves do foot by night:
	Take heed, ere summer comes or cuckoo-birds do sing.
	Away, Sir Corporal Nym!
	Believe it, Page; he speaks sense.

	[Exit]

FORD	[Aside]  I will be patient; I will find out this.

NYM	[To PAGE]  And this is true; I like not the humour
	of lying. He hath wronged me in some humours: I
	should have borne the humoured letter to her; but I
	have a sword and it shall bite upon my necessity.
	He loves your wife; there's the short and the long.
	My name is Corporal Nym; I speak and I avouch; 'tis
	true: my name is Nym and Falstaff loves your wife.
	Adieu. I love not the humour of bread and cheese,
	and there's the humour of it. Adieu.

	[Exit]

PAGE	'The humour of it,' quoth a'! here's a fellow
	frights English out of his wits.

FORD	I will seek out Falstaff.

PAGE	I never heard such a drawling, affecting rogue.

FORD	If I do find it: well.

PAGE	I will not believe such a Cataian, though the priest
	o' the town commended him for a true man.

FORD	'Twas a good sensible fellow: well.

PAGE	How now, Meg!

	[MISTRESS PAGE and MISTRESS FORD come forward]

MISTRESS PAGE	Whither go you, George? Hark you.

MISTRESS FORD	How now, sweet Frank! why art thou melancholy?

FORD	I melancholy! I am not melancholy. Get you home, go.

MISTRESS FORD	Faith, thou hast some crotchets in thy head. Now,
	will you go, Mistress Page?

MISTRESS PAGE	Have with you. You'll come to dinner, George.

	[Aside to MISTRESS FORD]

	Look who comes yonder: she shall be our messenger
	to this paltry knight.

MISTRESS FORD	[Aside to MISTRESS PAGE]  Trust me, I thought on her:
	she'll fit it.

	[Enter MISTRESS QUICKLY]

MISTRESS PAGE	You are come to see my daughter Anne?

MISTRESS QUICKLY	Ay, forsooth; and, I pray, how does good Mistress Anne?

MISTRESS PAGE	Go in with us and see: we have an hour's talk with
	you.

	[Exeunt MISTRESS PAGE, MISTRESS FORD, and MISTRESS QUICKLY]

PAGE	How now, Master Ford!

FORD	You heard what this knave told me, did you not?

PAGE	Yes: and you heard what the other told me?

FORD	Do you think there is truth in them?

PAGE	Hang 'em, slaves! I do not think the knight would
	offer it: but these that accuse him in his intent
	towards our wives are a yoke of his discarded men;
	very rogues, now they be out of service.

FORD	Were they his men?

PAGE	Marry, were they.

FORD	I like it never the better for that. Does he lie at
	the Garter?

PAGE	Ay, marry, does he. If he should intend this voyage
	towards my wife, I would turn her loose to him; and
	what he gets more of her than sharp words, let it
	lie on my head.

FORD	I do not misdoubt my wife; but I would be loath to
	turn them together. A man may be too confident: I
	would have nothing lie on my head: I cannot be thus satisfied.

PAGE	Look where my ranting host of the Garter comes:
	there is either liquor in his pate or money in his
	purse when he looks so merrily.

	[Enter Host]

	How now, mine host!

Host	How now, bully-rook! thou'rt a gentleman.
	Cavaleiro-justice, I say!

	[Enter SHALLOW]

SHALLOW	I follow, mine host, I follow. Good even and
	twenty, good Master Page! Master Page, will you go
	with us? we have sport in hand.

Host	Tell him, cavaleiro-justice; tell him, bully-rook.

SHALLOW	Sir, there is a fray to be fought between Sir Hugh
	the Welsh priest and Caius the French doctor.

FORD	Good mine host o' the Garter, a word with you.

	[Drawing him aside]

Host	What sayest thou, my bully-rook?

SHALLOW	[To PAGE]  Will you go with us to behold it? My
	merry host hath had the measuring of their weapons;
	and, I think, hath appointed them contrary places;
	for, believe me, I hear the parson is no jester.
	Hark, I will tell you what our sport shall be.

	[They converse apart]

Host	Hast thou no suit against my knight, my
	guest-cavaleire?

FORD	None, I protest: but I'll give you a pottle of
	burnt sack to give me recourse to him and tell him
	my name is Brook; only for a jest.

Host	My hand, bully; thou shalt have egress and regress;
	--said I well?--and thy name shall be Brook. It is
	a merry knight. Will you go, An-heires?